
Aeronautics and Space


Parts 60 to 109

Revised as of January 1, 2024

Containing a codification of documents of general
applicability and future effect

As of January 1, 2024
Published by the Office of the Federal Register
National Archives and Records Administration as a
Special Edition of the Federal Register

[[Page ii]]

U.S. GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL EDITION NOTICE

Legal Status and Use of Seals and Logos
<graphic(s) not="" available="" in="" tiff="" format="">

The seal of the National Archives and Records Administration
(NARA) authenticates the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) as
the official codification of Federal regulations established
under the Federal Register Act. Under the provisions of 44
U.S.C. 1507, the contents of the CFR, a special edition of the
Federal Register, shall be judicially noticed. The CFR is
prima facie evidence of the original documents published in
the Federal Register (44 U.S.C. 1510).

It is prohibited to use NARA's official seal and the stylized Code
of Federal Regulations logo on any republication of this
material without the express, written permission of the
Archivist of the United States or the Archivist's designee.
Any person using NARA's official seals and logos in a manner
inconsistent with the provisions of 36 CFR part 1200 is
subject to the penalties specified in 18 U.S.C. 506, 701, and
1017.

Use of ISBN Prefix

This is the Official U.S. Government edition of this publication
and is herein identified to certify its authenticity. Use of
the 0-16 ISBN prefix is for U.S. Government Publishing Office
Official Editions only. The Superintendent of Documents of the
U.S. Government Publishing Office requests that any reprinted
edition clearly be labeled as a copy of the authentic work
with a new ISBN.

<graphic(s) not="" available="" in="" tiff="" format="">

U . S . G O V E R N M E N T P U B L I S H I N G O F F I C E

------------------------------------------------------------------

U.S. Superintendent of Documents <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Washington, DC
20402-0001

http://bookstore.gpo.gov

Phone: toll-free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800

[[Page iii]]



<r02>
Table of Contents


<r03>
Page
Explanation.................................................       v

Title 14:
Chapter I--Federal Aviation Administration,
Department of Transportation (Continued)                   3
Finding Aids:
Table of CFR Titles and Chapters........................     921
Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR......     941
List of CFR Sections Affected...........................     951

[[Page iv]]





----------------------------

Cite this Code: CFR
To cite the regulations in
this volume use title,
part and section number.
Thus, 14 CFR 60.1 refers
to title 14, part 60,
section 1.

----------------------------

[[Page v]]



EXPLANATION

The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1

The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its
revision date (in this case, January 1, 2024), consult the ``List of CFR
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting
requirements.

PAST PROVISIONS OF THE CODE

Provisions of the Code that are no longer in force and effect as of
the revision date stated on the cover of each volume are not carried.
Code users may find the text of provisions in effect on any given date
in the past by using the appropriate List of CFR Sections Affected
(LSA). For the convenience of the reader, a ``List of CFR Sections
Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume. For changes to
the Code prior to the LSA listings at the end of the volume, consult
previous annual editions of the LSA. For changes to the Code prior to
2001, consult the List of CFR Sections Affected compilations, published
for 1949-1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, and 1986-2000.

``[RESERVED]'' TERMINOLOGY

The term ``[Reserved]'' is used as a place holder within the Code of
Federal Regulations. An agency may add regulatory information at a
``[Reserved]'' location at any time. Occasionally ``[Reserved]'' is used
editorially to indicate that a portion of the CFR was left vacant and
not dropped in error.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)).
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force
of law.
What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which
approval is based are:
(a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of
material published in the Federal Register.
(b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative
process.
(c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed as
an approved incorporation by reference, please contact the agency that
issued the regulation containing that incorporation. If, after
contacting the agency, you find the material is not available, please
notify the Director of the Federal Register, National Archives and
Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 20740-6001,
or call 202-741-6010.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Authorities
and Rules. A list of CFR titles, chapters, subchapters, and parts and an
alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are also included in
this volume.
An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within
that volume.

[[Page vii]]

The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form.
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in
the daily Federal Register.
A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at
the top of odd-numbered pages.
For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-741-6000
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National
Archives and Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD
20740-6001 or e-mail <a href="https://www.govinfo.gov/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection" class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="e5838081978082cb8c8b838aa58b849784cb828a93">[email&nbsp;protected]</a>.

SALES

The Government Publishing Office (GPO) processes all sales and
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call toll-free,
866-512-1800, or DC area, 202-512-1800, M-F 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or
fax your order to 202-512-2104, 24 hours a day. For payment by check,
write to: U.S. Government Publishing Office Superintendent of Documents,
P.O. Box 37082, Washington, DC 20013-7082.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, the LSA (List of
CFR Sections Affected), The United States Government Manual, the Federal
Register, Public Laws, Compilation of Presidential Documents and the
Privacy Act Compilation are available in electronic format via
www.govinfo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact
Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-
512-1800 (toll-free). E-mail, <a href="https://www.govinfo.gov/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection" class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="35765a5b4154564176505b4150477552455a1b525a43">[email&nbsp;protected]</a>.
The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) website for public
law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related information.
Connect to NARA's website at www.archives.gov/federal-register.
The eCFR is a regularly updated, unofficial editorial compilation of
CFR material and Federal Register amendments, produced by the Office of
the Federal Register and the Government Publishing Office. It is
available at www.ecfr.gov.

Oliver A. Potts,
Director,
Office of the Federal Register
January 1, 2024







[[Page ix]]



THIS TITLE

Title 14--Aeronautics and Space is composed of five volumes. The
parts in these volumes are arranged in the following order: Parts 1-59,
60-109, 110-199, 200-1199, and part 1200-End. The first three volumes
containing parts 1-199 are comprised of chapter I--Federal Aviation
Administration, Department of Transportation (DOT). The fourth volume
containing parts 200-1199 is comprised of chapter II--Office of the
Secretary, DOT (Aviation Proceedings) and chapter III--Commercial Space
Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, DOT. The fifth volume
containing part 1200-End is comprised of chapter V--National Aeronautics
and Space Administration and chapter VI--Air Transportation System
Stabilization. The contents of these volumes represent all current
regulations codified under this title of the CFR as of January 1, 2024.

For this volume, Christine Colaninno was Chief Editor. The Code of
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of John
Hyrum Martinez, assisted by Stephen J. Frattini.

[[Page 1]]


<r01>
TITLE 14--AERONAUTICS AND SPACE


<r02>

(This book contains parts 60 to 109)

--------------------------------------------------------------------
Part

chapter i--Federal Aviation Administration, Department of
Transportation (Continued)................................          60

[[Page 3]]


<r02>
CHAPTER I--FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
(CONTINUED)


<r03>

--------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCHAPTER D--AIRMEN
Part                                                                Page
60              Flight simulation training device initial
and continuing qualification and use....           5
61              Certification: Pilots, flight instructors,
and ground instructors..................         459
63              Certification: Flight crewmembers other than
pilots..................................         588
65              Certification: Airmen other than flight
crewmembers.............................         606
67              Medical standards and certification.........         629
68              Requirements for operating certain small
aircraft without a medical certificate..         641
SUBCHAPTER E--AIRSPACE
71              Designation of class A, B, C, D, and E
airspace areas; air traffic service
routes; and reporting points............         646
73              Special use airspace........................         651
75

[Reserved]

77              Safe, efficient use, and preservation of the
navigable airspace......................         653
SUBCHAPTER F--AIR TRAFFIC AND GENERAL OPERATING RULES
89              Remote identification of unmanned aircraft..         663
91              General operating and flight rules..........         676
93              Special air traffic rules...................         838
95              IFR altitudes...............................         872
97              Standard instrument procedures..............         880
99              Security control of air traffic.............         882
101             Moored balloons, kites, amateur rockets, and
unmanned free balloons..................         886
103             Ultralight vehicles.........................         892

[[Page 4]]

105             Parachute operations........................         894
106

[Reserved]

107             Small unmanned aircraft systems.............         900
108-109

[Reserved]

[[Page 5]]


<r03>
SUBCHAPTER D_AIRMEN

<r05>


<r03>
PART 60_FLIGHT SIMULATION TRAINING DEVICE INITIAL AND CONTINUING QUALIFICATION
AND USE--Table of Contents



Sec.
60.1 Applicability.
60.2 Applicability of sponsor rules to persons who are not sponsors and
who are engaged in certain unauthorized activities.
60.3 Definitions.
60.4 Qualification Performance Standards.
60.5 Quality management system.
60.7 Sponsor qualification requirements.
60.9 Additional responsibilities of the sponsor.
60.11 FSTD use.
60.13 FSTD objective data requirements.
60.14 Special equipment and personnel requirements for qualification of
the FSTD.
60.15 Initial qualification requirements.
60.16 Additional qualifications for a currently qualified FSTD.
60.17 Previously qualified FSTDs.
60.19 Inspection, continuing qualification evaluation, and maintenance
requirements.
60.20 Logging FSTD discrepancies.
60.21 Interim qualification of FSTDs for new aircraft types or models.
60.23 Modifications to FSTDs.
60.25 Operation with missing, malfunctioning, or inoperative components.
60.27 Automatic loss of qualification and procedures for restoration of
qualification.
60.29 Other losses of qualification and procedures for restoration of
qualification.
60.31 Recordkeeping and reporting.
60.33 Applications, logbooks, reports, and records: Fraud,
falsification, or incorrect statements.
60.35 Specific full flight simulator compliance requirements.
60.37 FSTD qualification on the basis of a Bilateral Aviation Safety
Agreement (BASA).

Appendix A to Part 60--Qualification Performance Standards for Airplane
Full Flight Simulators
Appendix B to Part 60--Qualification Performance Standards for Airplane
Flight Training Devices
Appendix C to Part 60--Qualification Performance Standards for
Helicopter Full Flight Simulators
Appendix D to Part 60--Qualification Performance Standards for
Helicopter Flight Training Devices
Appendix E to Part 60--Qualification Performance Standards for Quality
Management Systems for Flight Simulation Training Devices
Appendix F to Part 60--Definitions and Abbreviations for Flight
Simulation Training Devices

Authority: 49 U.S.C. 106(f), 106(g), 40113, and 44701; Pub. L. 111-
216, 124 Stat. 2348 (49 U.S.C. 44701 note)

Source: Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006,
unless otherwise noted.


<r05>
Sec.  60.1  Applicability.

(a) This part prescribes the rules governing the initial and
continuing qualification and use of all aircraft flight simulation
training devices (FSTD) used for meeting training, evaluation, or flight
experience requirements of this chapter for flight crewmember
certification or qualification.
(b) The rules of this part apply to each person using or applying to
use an FSTD to meet any requirement of this chapter.
(c) The requirements of Sec.  60.33 regarding falsification of
applications, records, or reports also apply to each person who uses an
FSTD for training, evaluation, or obtaining flight experience required
for flight crewmember certification or qualification under this chapter.


<r05>
Sec.  60.2  Applicability of sponsor rules to persons who are not sponsors
and who are engaged in certain unauthorized activities.

(a) The rules of this part that are directed to a sponsor of an FSTD
also apply to any person who uses or causes the use of an FSTD when--
(1) That person knows that the FSTD does not have an FAA-approved
sponsor; and
(2) The use of the FSTD by that person is nonetheless claimed for
purposes of meeting any requirement of this chapter or that person knows
or should have known that the person's acts or omissions would cause
another person to mistakenly credit use of the FSTD for purposes of
meeting any requirement of this chapter.

[[Page 6]]

(b) A situation in which paragraph (a) of this section would not
apply to a person would be when each of the following conditions are
met:
(1) The person sold or leased the FSTD and merely represented to the
purchaser or lessee that the FSTD is in a condition in which it should
be able to obtain FAA approval and qualification under this part;
(2) The person does not falsely claim to be the FAA-approved sponsor
for the FSTD;
(3) The person does not falsely make representations that someone
else is the FAA-approved sponsor of the FSTD at a time when that other
person is not the FAA-approved sponsor of the FSTD; and
(4) The person's acts or omissions do not cause another person to
detrimentally rely on such acts or omissions for the mistaken conclusion
that the FSTD is FAA-approved and qualified under this part at the time
the FSTD is sold or leased.


<r05>
Sec.  60.3  Definitions.

In addition to the definitions in part 1 of this chapter, other
terms and definitions applicable to this part are found in appendix F of
this part.


<r05>
Sec.  60.4  Qualification Performance Standards.

The Qualification Performance Standards (QPS) are published in
appendices to this part as follows:
(a) Appendix A contains the QPS for Airplane Flight Simulators.
(b) Appendix B contains the QPS for Airplane Flight Training
Devices.
(c) Appendix C contains the QPS for Helicopter Flight Simulators.
(d) Appendix D contains the QPS for Helicopter Flight Training
Devices.
(e) Appendix E contains the QPS for Quality Management Systems for
FSTDs.
(f) Appendix F contains the QPS for Definitions and Abbreviations
for FSTDs.


<r05>
Sec.  60.5  Quality management system.

(a) After May 30, 2010, no sponsor may use or allow the use of or
offer the use of an FSTD for flight crewmember training or evaluation or
for obtaining flight experience to meet any requirement of this chapter
unless the sponsor has established and follows a quality management
system (QMS), currently approved by the responsible Flight Standards
office, for the continuing surveillance and analysis of the sponsor's
performance and effectiveness in providing a satisfactory FSTD for use
on a regular basis as described in QPS appendix E of this part.
(b) The QMS program must provide a process for identifying
deficiencies in the program and for documenting how the program will be
changed to address these deficiencies.
(c) Whenever the responsible Flight Standards office finds that the
QMS program does not adequately address the procedures necessary to meet
the requirements of this part, the sponsor must, after notification by
the responsible Flight Standards office, change the program so the
procedures meet the requirements of this part. Each such change must be
approved by the responsible Flight Standards office prior to
implementation.
(d) Within 30 days after the sponsor receives a notice described in
paragraph (c) of this section, the sponsor may file a petition with the
Executive Director of Flight Standards Service (the Executive Director)
for reconsideration of the responsible Flight Standards office finding.
The sponsor must address its petition to the Executive Director, Flight
Standards Service, Federal Aviation Administration, 800 Independence
Ave., SW., Washington, DC 20591. The filing of such a petition to
reconsider stays the notice pending a decision by the Executive
Director. However, if the Executive Director finds that there is a
situation that requires immediate action in the interest of safety in
air commerce, he may, upon a statement of the reasons, require a change
effective without stay.

[Doc. No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006; Amdt. 60-2, 72 FR
59599, Oct. 22, 2007, as amended by Docket FAA-2018-0119, Amdt. 60-5, 83
FR 9170, Mar. 5, 2018; Docket No. FAA-2022-1355; Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR
75711, Dec. 9, 2022]

[[Page 7]]


<r05>
Sec.  60.7  Sponsor qualification requirements.

(a) A person is eligible to apply to be a sponsor of an FSTD if the
following conditions are met:
(1) The person holds, or is an applicant for, a certificate under
part 119, 141, or 142 of this chapter; or holds, or is an applicant for,
an approved flight engineer course in accordance with part 63 of this
chapter.
(2) The FSTD will be used, or will be offered for use, in the
sponsor's FAA-approved flight training program for the aircraft being
simulated as evidenced in a request for evaluation submitted to the
responsible Flight Standards office.
(b) A person is a sponsor if the following conditions are met:
(1) The person is a certificate holder under part 119, 141, or 142
of this chapter or has an approved flight engineer course in accordance
with part 63 of this chapter.
(2) The person has--
(i) Operations specifications authorizing the use of the specific
aircraft or set of aircraft and has an FAA-approved training program
under which at least one FSTD, simulating the aircraft or set of
aircraft and for which the person is the sponsor, is used by the sponsor
as described in paragraphs (b)(5) or (b)(6) of this section; or
(ii) Training specifications or an FAA-approved course of training
under which at least one FSTD, simulating that aircraft or set of
aircraft and for which the person is the sponsor, is used by the sponsor
as described in paragraphs (b)(5) or (b)(6) of this section.
(3) The person has a quality management system currently approved by
the responsible Flight Standards office in accordance with Sec.  60.5.
(4) The responsible Flight Standards office has accepted the person
as the sponsor of the FSTD and that acceptance has not been withdrawn by
the FAA.
(5) At least one FSTD (as referenced in paragraph (b)(2)(i) or
(b)(2)(ii) of this section) that is initially qualified on or after May
30, 2008, is used within the sponsor's FAA-approved flight training
program for the aircraft or set of aircraft at least once within the 12-
month period following the initial/upgrade evaluation, and at least once
within each subsequent 12-month period thereafter.
(6) At least one FSTD (as referenced in paragraph (b)(2)(i) or
(b)(2)(ii) of this section) that was qualified before May 30, 2008, is
used within the sponsor's FAA-approved flight training program for the
aircraft or set of aircraft at least once within the 12-month period
following the first continuing qualification evaluation conducted by the
responsible Flight Standards office after May 30, 2008 and at least once
within each subsequent 12-month period thereafter.
(c) If the use requirements of paragraphs (b)(2) and either (b)(5)
or (b)(6) of this section are not met, the person will forfeit the right
to sponsor that FSTD and that person will not be eligible to apply to
sponsor that FSTD for at least 12 calendar months following the
expiration of the qualification status.
(d) In addition to the FSTD described in paragraph (b) of this
section, an FSTD sponsor may sponsor any number of other FSTDs
regardless of specific aircraft or set of aircraft provided either--
(1) During the preceding 12-month period, all of the other FSTDs are
used within the sponsor's or another certificate holder's FAA-approved
flight training program for the aircraft or set of aircraft simulated;
or
(2) The sponsor obtains a written statement at least annually from a
qualified pilot who has flown the aircraft or set of aircraft (as
appropriate) during the preceding 12-month period stating that the
subject FSTD's performance and handling qualities, within the normal
operating envelope, represent the aircraft or set of aircraft described
in the FAA Type Certificate and the type data sheet, if appropriate. The
sponsor must retain the two most current written statements for review
by the responsible Flight Standards office.

[Doc. No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006; Amdt. 60-2, 72 FR
59599, Oct. 22, 2007, as amended by Docket No. FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No.
60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]

[[Page 8]]


<r05>
Sec.  60.9  Additional responsibilities of the sponsor.

(a) The sponsor must allow the responsible Flight Standards office
upon request to inspect the FSTD as soon as practicable. This inspection
may include all records and documents relating to the FSTD, to determine
its compliance with this part.
(b) The sponsor must do the following for each FSTD:
(1) Establish a mechanism to receive written comments regarding the
FSTD and its operation in accordance with the QPS appendix E of this
part.
(2) Post in or adjacent to the FSTD the Statement of Qualification
issued by the responsible Flight Standards office. An electronic copy of
the Statement of Qualification that may be accessed by an appropriate
terminal or display in or adjacent to the FSTD is satisfactory.
(c) Each sponsor of an FSTD must identify to the responsible Flight
Standards office by name, one individual to be the management
representative (MR).
(1) One person may serve as an MR for more than one FSTD, but one
FSTD must not have more than one person serving in this capacity.
(2) Each MR must be an employee of the sponsor with the
responsibility and authority to--
(i) Monitor the on-going qualification of assigned FSTDs to ensure
that all matters regarding FSTD qualification are being carried out as
provided for in this part;
(ii) Ensure that the QMS is properly established, implemented, and
maintained by overseeing the structure (and modifying where necessary)
of the QMS policies, practices, and procedures; and
(iii) Regularly brief sponsor's management on the status of the on-
going FSTD qualification program and the effectiveness and efficiency of
the QMS.
(3) The MR serves as the primary contact point for all matters
between the sponsor and the responsible Flight Standards office
regarding the qualification of that FSTD as provided for in this part.
(4) The MR may delegate the duties described in paragraph (c)(2) and
(c)(3) of this section to an individual at each of the sponsor's
locations.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket No. FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.11  FSTD use.

No person may use or allow the use of or offer the use of an FSTD
for flight crewmember training or evaluation or for obtaining flight
experience to meet any of the requirements under this chapter unless, in
accordance with the QPS for the specific device, the FSTD meets all of
the following:
(a) Has a single sponsor who is qualified under Sec.  60.7. The
sponsor may arrange with another person for services of document
preparation and presentation, as well as FSTD inspection, maintenance,
repair, and servicing; however, the sponsor remains responsible for
ensuring that these functions are conducted in a manner and with a
result of continually meeting the requirements of this part.
(b) Is qualified as described in the Statement of Qualification.
(c) Remains qualified, through satisfactory inspection, continuing
qualification evaluations, appropriate maintenance, and use requirements
in accordance with this part and the applicable QPS.
(d) Functions during day-to-day training, evaluation, or flight
experience activities with the software and hardware that was evaluated
as satisfactory by the responsible Flight Standards office and, if
modified, modified only in accordance with the provisions of this part.
However, this section does not apply to routine software or hardware
changes that do not fall under the requirements of Sec.  60.23.
(e) Is operated in accordance with the provisions and limitations of
Sec.  60.25.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket No. FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.13  FSTD objective data requirements.

(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) and (c) of this section, for
the purposes of validating FSTD performance

[[Page 9]]

and handling qualities during evaluation for qualification, the data
made available to the responsible Flight Standards office (the
validation data package) must include the aircraft manufacturer's flight
test data and all relevant data developed after the type certificate was
issued (e.g., data developed in response to an airworthiness directive)
if such data results from a change in performance, handling qualities,
functions, or other characteristics of the aircraft that must be
considered for flight crewmember training, evaluation, or for meeting
experience requirements of this chapter.
(b) The validation data package may contain flight test data from a
source in addition to or independent of the aircraft manufacturer's data
in support of an FSTD qualification, but only if this data is gathered
and developed by that source in accordance with flight test methods,
including a flight test plan, as described in the applicable QPS.
(c) The validation data package may also contain predicted data,
engineering simulation data, data from pilot owner or pilot operating
manuals, or data from public domain sources, provided this data is
acceptable to the responsible Flight Standards office. If found
acceptable the data may then be used in particular applications for FSTD
qualification.
(d) Data or other material or elements must be submitted in a form
and manner acceptable to the responsible Flight Standards office.
(e) The responsible Flight Standards office may require additional
objective data, which may include flight testing if necessary, if the
validation data package does not support FSTD qualification requirements
as described in this part and the applicable QPS appendix.
(f) When an FSTD sponsor learns, or is advised by an aircraft
manufacturer or other data provider, that an addition to, an amendment
to, or a revision of data that may relate to FSTD performance or
handling characteristics is available, the sponsor must notify the
responsible Flight Standards office as described in the applicable QPS.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket No. FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.14  Special equipment and personnel requirements for qualification
of the FSTD.

When notified by the responsible Flight Standards office, the
sponsor must make available all special equipment and qualified
personnel needed to accomplish or assist in the accomplishment of tests
during initial qualification, continuing qualification, or special
evaluations.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket No. FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.15  Initial qualification requirements.

(a) For each FSTD, the sponsor must submit a request to the
responsible Flight Standards office to evaluate the FSTD for initial
qualification at a specific level and simultaneously request the
Training Program Approval Authority (TPAA) forward a concurring letter
to the responsible Flight Standards office. The request must be
submitted in the form and manner described in the applicable QPS.
(b) The management representative described in Sec.  60.9(c) must
sign a statement (electronic signature is acceptable for electronic
transmissions) after confirming the following:
(1) The performance and handling qualities of the FSTD represent
those of the aircraft or set of aircraft within the normal operating
envelope. This determination must be made by a pilot(s) meeting the
requirements of paragraph (d) of this section after having flown all of
the Operations Tasks listed in the applicable QPS appendix relevant to
the qualification level of the FSTD. Exceptions, if any, must be noted.
The name of the person(s) making this determination must be available to
the responsible Flight Standards office upon request.
(2) The FSTD systems and sub-systems (including the simulated
aircraft systems) functionally represent those

[[Page 10]]

in the aircraft or set of aircraft. This determination must be made by
the pilot(s) described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, or by a
person(s) trained on simulator systems/sub-systems and trained on the
operation of the simulated aircraft systems, after having exercised the
operation of the FSTD and the pertinent functions available through the
Instructor Operating Station(s). Exceptions, if any, must be noted. The
name of the person(s) making this determination must be available to the
responsible Flight Standards office upon request.
(3) The cockpit represents the configuration of the specific type;
or aircraft make, model, and series aircraft being simulated, as
appropriate. This determination must be made by the pilot(s) described
in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, or by a person(s) trained on the
configuration and operation of the aircraft simulated. Exceptions, if
any, must be noted. The name of the person(s) making this determination
must be available to the responsible Flight Standards office upon
request.
(c) Except for those FSTDs previously qualified and described in
Sec.  60.17, each FSTD evaluated for initial qualification must meet the
standard that is in effect at the time of the evaluation. However--
(1) If the FAA publishes a change to the existing standard or
publishes a new standard for the evaluation for initial qualification, a
sponsor may request that the responsible Flight Standards office apply
the standard that was in effect when an FSTD was ordered for delivery if
the sponsor--
(i) Within 30 days of the publication of the change to the existing
standard or publication of the new standard, notifies the responsible
Flight Standards office that an FSTD has been ordered;
(ii) Within 90 days of the responsible Flight Standards office
notification described in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section, requests
that the standard in effect at the time the order was placed be used for
the evaluation for initial qualification; and
(iii) The evaluation is conducted within 24 months following the
publication of the change to the existing standard or publication of the
new standard.
(2) This notification must include a description of the FSTD; the
anticipated qualification level of the FSTD; the make, model, and series
of aircraft simulated; and any other pertinent information.
(3) Any tests, tolerances, or other requirements that are current at
the time of the evaluation may be used during the initial evaluation, at
the request of the sponsor, if the sponsor provides acceptable updates
to the required qualification test guide.
(4) The standards used for the evaluation for initial qualification
will be used for all subsequent evaluations of the FSTD.
(5) An FSTD sponsor or FSTD manufacturer may submit a request to the
Administrator for approval of a deviation from the QPS requirements as
defined in Appendix A through Appendix D of this part.
(i) Requests for deviation must be submitted in a form and manner
acceptable to the Administrator and must provide sufficient
justification that the deviation meets or exceeds the testing
requirements and tolerances as specified in the part 60 QPS or will
otherwise not adversely affect the fidelity and capability of the FSTDs
evaluated and qualified under the deviation.
(ii) The Administrator may consider deviation from the minimum
requirements tables, the objective testing tables, the functions and
subjective testing tables, and other supporting tables and requirements
in the part 60 QPS.
(iii) Deviations may be issued to an FSTD manufacturer for the
initial qualification of multiple FSTDs, subject to terms and
limitations as determined by Administrator. Approved deviations will
become a part of the permanent qualification basis of the individual
FSTD and will be noted in the FSTD's Statement of Qualification.
(iv) If the FAA publishes a change to the existing part 60 standards
as described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section or issues an FSTD
Directive as described in Sec.  60.23(b), which conflicts with or
supersedes an approved deviation, the Administrator may terminate or
revise a grant of deviation authority issued under this paragraph.

[[Page 11]]

(d) The pilot(s) who contributes to the confirmation statement
required by paragraph (b) of this section must--
(1) Be designated by the sponsor; and
(2) Be qualified in--
(i) The aircraft or set of aircraft being simulated; or
(ii) For aircraft not yet issued a type certificate, or aircraft not
previously operated by the sponsor or not having previous FAA-approved
training programs conducted by the sponsor, an aircraft similar in size
and configuration.
(e) The subjective tests that form the basis for the statements
described in paragraph (b) of this section and the objective tests
referenced in paragraph (f) of this section must be accomplished at the
sponsor's training facility or other sponsor designated location where
training will take place, except as provided for in the applicable QPS.
(f) The person seeking to qualify the FSTD must provide the
responsible Flight Standards office access to the FSTD for the length of
time necessary for the responsible Flight Standards office to complete
the required evaluation of the FSTD for initial qualification, which
includes the conduct and evaluation of objective and subjective tests,
including general FSTD requirements, as described in the applicable QPS,
to determine that the FSTD meets the standards in that QPS.
(g) When the FSTD passes an evaluation for initial qualification,
the responsible Flight Standards office issues a Statement of
Qualification that includes all of the following:
(1) Identification of the sponsor.
(2) Identification of the make, model, and series of the aircraft or
set of aircraft being simulated.
(3) Identification of the configuration of the aircraft or set of
aircraft being simulated (e.g., engine model or models, flight
instruments, or navigation or other systems).
(4) A statement that the FSTD is qualified as either a full flight
simulator or a flight training device.
(5) Identification of the qualification level of the FSTD.
(6) A statement that (with the exception of the noted exclusions for
which the FSTD has not been subjectively tested by the sponsor or the
responsible Flight Standards office and for which qualification is not
sought) the qualification of the FSTD includes the tasks set out in the
applicable QPS appendix relevant to the qualification level of the FSTD.
(7) A statement referencing any deviations that have been granted
and included in the permanent qualification basis of the FSTD.
(h) After the responsible Flight Standards office completes the
evaluation for initial qualification, the sponsor must update the
Qualification Test Guide (QTG), with the results of the FAA-witnessed
tests together with the results of all the objective tests described in
the applicable QPS.
(i) Upon issuance of the Statement of Qualification the updated QTG
becomes the Master Qualification Test Guide (MQTG). The MQTG must be
made available to the responsible Flight Standards office upon request.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket FAA-2014-0391, Amdt. 60-4, 81 FR 18217, Mar. 30, 2016; Docket No.
FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.16  Additional qualifications for a currently qualified FSTD.

(a) A currently qualified FSTD is required to undergo an additional
qualification process if a user intends to use the FSTD for meeting
training, evaluation, or flight experience requirements of this chapter
beyond the qualification issued for that FSTD. This process consists of
the following:
(1) The sponsor:
(i) Must submit to the responsible Flight Standards office all
modifications to the MQTG that are required to support the additional
qualification.
(ii) Must describe to the responsible Flight Standards office all
modifications to the FSTD that are required to support the additional
qualification.
(iii) Must submit to the responsible Flight Standards office a
confirmation statement as described in Sec.  60.15(c) that a pilot,
designated by the sponsor in accordance with Sec.  60.15(d), has
subjectively evaluated the FSTD in those areas not previously evaluated.
(2) The FSTD must successfully pass an evaluation--

[[Page 12]]

(i) Consisting of all the elements of an initial evaluation for
qualification in those circumstances where the responsible Flight
Standards office has determined that all the elements of an initial
evaluation for qualification is necessary; or
(ii) Consisting of those elements of an initial evaluation for
qualification designated as necessary by the responsible Flight
Standards office.
(b) In making the determinations described in paragraph (a)(2) of
this section, the responsible Flight Standards office considers factors
including the existing qualification of the FSTD, any modifications to
the FSTD hardware or software that are involved, and any additions or
modifications to the MQTG.
(c) The FSTD is qualified for the additional uses when the
responsible Flight Standards office issues an amended Statement of
Qualification in accordance with Sec.  60.15(h).
(d) The sponsor may not modify the FSTD except as described in Sec.
60.23.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket No. FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.17  Previously qualified FSTDs.

(a) Unless otherwise specified by an FSTD Directive, further
referenced in the applicable QPS, or as specified in paragraph (e) of
this section, an FSTD qualified before May 31, 2016 will retain its
qualification basis as long as it continues to meet the standards,
including the objective test results recorded in the MQTG and subjective
tests, under which it was originally evaluated, regardless of sponsor.
The sponsor of such an FSTD must comply with the other applicable
provisions of this part.
(b) For each FSTD qualified before May 30, 2008, no sponsor may use
or allow the use of or offer the use of such an FSTD after May 30, 2014
for flight crewmember training, evaluation or flight experience to meet
any of the requirements of this chapter, unless that FSTD has been
issued a Statement of Qualification, including the Configuration List
and the List of Qualified Tasks in accordance with the procedures set
out in the applicable QPS.
(c) If the FSTD qualification is lost under Sec.  60.27 and--
(i) Restored under Sec.  60.27 in less than (2) years, then the
qualification basis (in terms of objective tests and subjective tests)
for the re-qualification will be those against which the FSTD was
originally evaluated and qualified.
(ii) Not restored under Sec.  60.27 for two (2) years or more, then
the qualification basis (in terms of objective tests and subjective
tests) for the re-qualification will be those standards in effect and
current at the time of re-qualification application.
(d) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, any change
in FSTD qualification level initiated on or after May 30, 2008 requires
an evaluation for initial qualification in accordance with this part.
(e) A sponsor may request that an FSTD be permanently downgraded. In
such a case, the responsible Flight Standards office may downgrade a
qualified FSTD without requiring and without conducting an initial
evaluation for the new qualification level. Subsequent continuing
qualification evaluations will use the existing MQTG, modified as
necessary to reflect the new qualification level.
(f) When the sponsor has appropriate validation data available and
receives approval from the responsible Flight Standards office, the
sponsor may adopt tests and associated tolerances described in the
current qualification standards as the tests and tolerances applicable
for the continuing qualification of a previously qualified FSTD. The
updated test(s) and tolerance(s) must be made a permanent part of the
MQTG.

[Doc. No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006; Amdt. 60-2, 72 FR
59599, Oct. 22, 2007, as amended by Docket FAA-2014-0391, Amdt. 60-4, 81
FR 18218, Mar. 30, 2016; Docket No. FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR
75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.19  Inspection, continuing qualification evaluation,
and maintenance requirements.

(a) Inspection. No sponsor may use or allow the use of or offer the
use of an FSTD for flight crewmember training, evaluation, or flight
experience to meet any of the requirements of this chapter unless the
sponsor does the following:

[[Page 13]]

(1) Accomplishes all appropriate objective tests each year as
specified in the applicable QPS.
(2) Completes a functional preflight check within the preceding 24
hours.
(b) Continuing qualification evaluation. (1) This evaluation
consists of objective tests, and subjective tests, including general
FSTD requirements, as described in the applicable QPS or as may be
amended by an FSTD Directive.
(2) The sponsor must contact the responsible Flight Standards office
to schedule the FSTD for continuing qualification evaluations not later
than 60 days before the evaluation is due.
(3) The sponsor must provide the responsible Flight Standards office
responsible Flight Standards office access to the objective test results
in the MQTG and access to the FSTD for the length of time necessary for
the responsible Flight Standards office to complete the required
continuing qualification evaluations.
(4) The frequency of the responsible Flight Standards office-
conducted continuing qualification evaluations for each FSTD will be
established by the responsible Flight Standards office and specified in
the Statement of Qualification.
(5) Continuing qualification evaluations conducted in the 3 calendar
months before or after the calendar month in which these continuing
qualification evaluations are required will be considered to have been
conducted in the calendar month in which they were required.
(6) No sponsor may use or allow the use of or offer the use of an
FSTD for flight crewmember training or evaluation or for obtaining
flight experience for the flight crewmember to meet any requirement of
this chapter unless the FSTD has passed a responsible Flight Standards
office-conducted continuing qualification evaluation within the time
frame specified in the Statement of Qualification or within the grace
period as described in paragraph (b)(5) of this section.
(c) Maintenance. The sponsor is responsible for continuing
corrective and preventive maintenance on the FSTD to ensure that it
continues to meet the requirements of this part and the applicable QPS
appendix. No sponsor may use or allow the use of or offer the use of an
FSTD for flight crewmember training, evaluation, or flight experience to
meet any of the requirements of this chapter unless the sponsor does the
following:
(1) Maintains a discrepancy log.
(2) Ensures that, when a discrepancy is discovered, the following
requirements are met:
(i) A description of each discrepancy is entered in the log and
remains in the log until the discrepancy is corrected as specified in
Sec.  60.25(b).
(ii) A description of the corrective action taken for each
discrepancy, the identity of the individual taking the action, and the
date that action is taken is entered in the log.
(iii) The discrepancy log is kept in a form and manner acceptable to
the Administrator and is kept in or adjacent to the FSTD. An electronic
log that may be accessed by an appropriate terminal or display in or
adjacent to the FSTD is satisfactory.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket FAA-2014-0391, Amdt. 60-4, 81 FR 18218, Mar. 30, 2016; Docket No.
FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.20  Logging FSTD discrepancies.

Each instructor, check airman, or representative of the
Administrator conducting training, evaluation, or flight experience, and
each person conducting the preflight inspection who discovers a
discrepancy, including any missing, malfunctioning, or inoperative
components in the FSTD, must write or cause to be written a description
of that discrepancy into the discrepancy log at the end of the FSTD
preflight or FSTD use session.


<r05>
Sec.  60.21  Interim qualification of FSTDs for new aircraft types or models.

(a) A sponsor may apply for and the responsible Flight Standards
office may issue an interim qualification level for an FSTD for a new
type or model of aircraft, even though the aircraft manufacturer's
aircraft data package is preliminary, if the sponsor provides the
following to the satisfaction of the responsible Flight Standards
office--

[[Page 14]]

(1) The aircraft manufacturer's data, which consists of at least
predicted data, validated by a limited set of flight test data;
(2) The aircraft manufacturer's description of the prediction
methodology used to develop the predicted data; and
(3) The QTG test results.
(b) An FSTD that has been issued interim qualification is deemed to
have been issued initial qualification unless the responsible Flight
Standards office rescinds the qualification. Interim qualification
terminates two years after its issuance, unless the responsible Flight
Standards office determines that specific conditions warrant otherwise.
(c) Within twelve months of the release of the final aircraft data
package by the aircraft manufacturer, but no later than two years after
the issuance of the interim qualification status, the sponsor must apply
for initial qualification in accordance with Sec.  60.15 based on the
final aircraft data package approved by the aircraft manufacturer,
unless the responsible Flight Standards office determines that specific
conditions warrant otherwise.
(d) An FSTD with interim qualification may be modified only in
accordance with Sec.  60.23.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket No. FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.23  Modifications to FSTDs.

(a) Description of a modification. For the purposes of this part, an
FSTD is said to have been modified when:
(1) Equipment or devices intended to simulate aircraft appliances
are added to or removed from FSTD, which change the Statement of
Qualification or the MQTG; or
(2) Changes are made to either software or hardware that are
intended to impact flight or ground dynamics; changes are made that
impact performance or handling characteristics of the FSTD (including
motion, visual, control loading, or sound systems for those FSTD levels
requiring sound tests and measurements); or changes are made to the
MQTG. Changes to the MQTG which do not affect required objective testing
results or validation data approved during the initial evaluation of the
FSTD are not considered modifications under this section.
(b) FSTD Directive. When the FAA determines that FSTD modification
is necessary for safety of flight reasons, the sponsor of each affected
FSTD must ensure that the FSTD is modified according to the FSTD
Directive regardless of the original qualification standards applicable
to any specific FSTD.
(c) Using the modified FSTD. The sponsor may not use, or allow the
use of, or offer the use of, the FSTD with the proposed modification for
flight crewmember training or evaluation or for obtaining flight
experience for the flight crewmember to meet any requirement of this
chapter unless:
(1) The sponsor has notified the responsible Flight Standards office
and the TPAA of their intent to incorporate the proposed modification,
and one of the following has occurred;
(i) Twenty-one days have passed since the sponsor notified the
responsible Flight Standards office and the TPAA of the proposed
modification and the sponsor has not received any response from either
the responsible Flight Standards office or the TPAA;
(ii) Twenty-one days have passed since the sponsor notified the
responsible Flight Standards office and the TPAA of the proposed
modification and one has approved the proposed modification and the
other has not responded;
(iii) Fewer than twenty-one days have passed since the sponsor
notified the responsible Flight Standards office and the TPAA of the
proposed modification and the responsible Flight Standards office and
TPAA both approve the proposed modification;
(iv) The sponsor has successfully completed any evaluation the
responsible Flight Standards office may require in accordance with the
standards for an evaluation for initial qualification or any part
thereof before the modified FSTD is placed in service.
(2) The notification is submitted with the content as, and in a form
and manner as, specified in the applicable QPS.
(d) User notification. When a modification is made to an FSTD that
affects

[[Page 15]]

the Statement of Qualification, the sponsor must post an addendum to the
Statement of Qualification until such time as a permanent, updated
statement is posted.
(e) MQTG update. The MQTG must be updated with current objective
test results in accordance with Sec.  60.15(h) and (i) and appropriate
objective data in accordance with Sec.  60.13, each time an FSTD is
modified and an objective test or other MQTG section is affected by the
modification. If an FSTD Directive is the cause of this update, the
direction to make the modification and the record of the modification
completion must be filed in the MQTG.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket FAA-2014-0391, Amdt. 60-4, 81 FR 18218, Mar. 30, 2016; Docket No.
FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.25  Operation with missing, malfunctioning, or inoperative components.

(a) No person may knowingly use or allow the use of or misrepresent
the capability of an FSTD for any maneuver, procedure, or task that is
to be accomplished to meet training, evaluation, or flight experience
requirements of this chapter for flight crewmember certification or
qualification when there is a missing, malfunctioning, or inoperative
(MMI) component that is required to be present and correctly operate for
the satisfactory completion of that maneuver, procedure, or task.
(b) Each MMI component as described in paragraph (a) of this
section, or any MMI component installed and required to operate
correctly to meet the current Statement of Qualification, must be
repaired or replaced within 30 calendar days, unless otherwise required
or authorized by the responsible Flight Standards office.
(c) A list of the current MMI components must be readily available
in or adjacent to the FSTD for review by users of the device. Electronic
access to this list via an appropriate terminal or display in or
adjacent to the FSTD is satisfactory. The discrepancy log may be used to
satisfy this requirement provided each currently MMI component is listed
in the discrepancy log.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket No. FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.27  Automatic loss of qualification and procedures
for restoration of qualification.

(a) An FSTD qualification is automatically lost when any of the
following occurs:
(1) The FSTD is not used in the sponsor's FAA-approved flight
training program in accordance with Sec.  60.7(b)(5) or (b)(6) and the
sponsor does not obtain and maintain the written statement as described
in Sec.  60.7(d)(2).
(2) The FSTD is not inspected in accordance with Sec.  60.19.
(3) The FSTD is physically moved from one location and installed in
a different location, regardless of distance.
(4) The MQTG is missing or otherwise not available and a replacement
is not made within 30 days.
(b) If FSTD qualification is lost under paragraph (a) of this
section, qualification is restored when either of the following
provisions is met:
(1) The FSTD successfully passes an evaluation:
(i) For initial qualification, in accordance with Sec. Sec.  60.15
and 60.17(c) in those circumstances where the responsible Flight
Standards office has determined that a full evaluation for initial
qualification is necessary; or
(ii) For those elements of an evaluation for initial qualification,
in accordance with Sec. Sec.  60.15 and 60.17(c), as determined to be
necessary by the responsible Flight Standards office.
(2) The responsible Flight Standards office advises the sponsor that
an evaluation is not necessary.
(c) In making the determinations described in paragraph (b) of this
section, the responsible Flight Standards office considers factors
including the number of continuing qualification evaluations missed, the
number of sponsor-conducted quarterly inspections missed,

[[Page 16]]

and the care that had been taken of the device since the last
evaluation.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket No. FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.29  Other losses of qualification and procedures for restoration
of qualification.

(a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, when the
responsible Flight Standards office determines that the FSTD no longer
meets qualification standards, the following procedure applies:
(1) The responsible Flight Standards office notifies the sponsor in
writing that the FSTD no longer meets some or all of its qualification
standards.
(2) The responsible Flight Standards office sets a reasonable period
(but not less than 7 days) within which the sponsor may submit written
information, views, and arguments on the FSTD qualification.
(3) After considering all material presented, the responsible Flight
Standards office notifies the sponsor about the determination with
regard to the qualification of the FSTD.
(4) When the responsible Flight Standards office notifies the
sponsor that some or all of the FSTD is no longer qualified, the action
described in the notification becomes effective not less than 30 days
after the sponsor receives that notice unless--
(i) The responsible Flight Standards office finds under paragraph
(c) of this section that there is an emergency requiring immediate
action with respect to safety in air commerce; or
(ii) The sponsor petitions the Executive Director of Flight
Standards Service for reconsideration of the responsible Flight
Standards office finding under paragraph (b) of this section.
(b) When a sponsor seeks reconsideration of a decision from the
responsible Flight Standards office concerning the FSTD qualification,
the following procedure applies:
(1) The sponsor must petition for reconsideration of that decision
within 30 days of the date that the sponsor receives a notice that some
or all of the FSTD is no longer qualified.
(2) The sponsor must address its petition to the Executive Director,
Flight Standards Service, Federal Aviation Administration, 800
Independence Ave., SW., Washington, DC 20591.
(3) A petition for reconsideration, if filed within the 30-day
period, suspends the effectiveness of the determination by the
responsible Flight Standards office that the FSTD is no longer qualified
unless the responsible Flight Standards office has found, under
paragraph (c) of this section, that an emergency exists requiring
immediate action with respect to safety in air commerce.
(c) If the responsible Flight Standards office find that an
emergency exists requiring immediate action with respect to safety in
air commerce that makes the procedures set out in this section
impracticable or contrary to the public interest:
(1) The responsible Flight Standards office withdraws qualification
of some or all of the FSTD and makes the withdrawal of qualification
effective on the day the sponsor receives notice of it.
(2) In the notice to the sponsor, the responsible Flight Standards
office articulates the reasons for its finding that an emergency exists
requiring immediate action with respect to safety in air transportation
or air commerce or that makes it impracticable or contrary to the public
interest to stay the effectiveness of the finding.
(d) FSTD qualification lost under paragraph (a) or (c) of this
section may be restored when either of the following provisions are met:
(1) The FSTD successfully passes an evaluation for initial
qualification, in accordance with Sec. Sec.  60.15 and 60.17(c) in those
circumstances where the responsible Flight Standards office has
determined that a full evaluation for initial qualification is
necessary; or
(2) The FSTD successfully passes an evaluation for those elements of
an initial qualification evaluation, in accordance with Sec. Sec.  60.15
and 60.17(c), as determined to be necessary by the responsible Flight
Standards office.
(e) In making the determinations described in paragraph (d) of this
section, the responsible Flight Standards office considers factors
including the reason

[[Page 17]]

for the loss of qualification, any repairs or replacements that may have
to have been completed, the number of continuing qualification
evaluations missed, the number of sponsor-conducted quarterly
inspections missed, and the care that had been taken of the device since
the loss of qualification.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket FAA-2018-0119, Amdt. 60-5, 83 FR 9170, Mar. 5, 2018; Docket No.
FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.31  Recordkeeping and reporting.

(a) The FSTD sponsor must maintain the following records for each
FSTD it sponsors:
(1) The MQTG and each amendment thereto.
(2) A record of all FSTD modifications affected under Sec.  60.23
since the issuance of the original Statement of Qualification.
(3) A copy of all of the following:
(i) Results of the qualification evaluations (initial and each
upgrade) since the issuance of the original Statement of Qualification.
(ii) Results of the objective tests conducted in accordance with
Sec.  60.19(a) for a period of 2 years.
(iii) Results of the previous three continuing qualification
evaluations, or the continuing qualification evaluations from the
previous 2 years, whichever covers a longer period.
(iv) Comments obtained in accordance with Sec.  60.9(b) for a period
of at least 90 days.
(4) A record of all discrepancies entered in the discrepancy log
over the previous 2 years, including the following:
(i) A list of the components or equipment that were or are missing,
malfunctioning, or inoperative.
(ii) The action taken to correct the discrepancy.
(iii) The date the corrective action was taken.
(iv) The identity of the person determining that the discrepancy has
been corrected.
(b) The records specified in this section must be maintained in
plain language form or in coded form if the coded form provides for the
preservation and retrieval of information in a manner acceptable to the
responsible Flight Standards office.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket No. FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec.  60.33  Applications, logbooks, reports, and records:
Fraud, falsification, or incorrect statements.

(a) No person may make, or cause to be made, any of the following:
(1) A fraudulent or intentionally false statement in any application
or any amendment thereto, or any other report or test result required by
this part.
(2) A fraudulent or intentionally false statement in or a known
omission from any record or report that is kept, made, or used to show
compliance with this part, or to exercise any privileges under this
chapter.
(3) Any reproduction or alteration, for fraudulent purpose, of any
report, record, or test result required under this part.
(b) The commission by any person of any act prohibited under
paragraph (a) of this section is a basis for any one or any combination
of the following:
(1) A civil penalty.
(2) Suspension or revocation of any certificate held by that person
that was issued under this chapter.
(3) The removal of FSTD qualification and approval for use in a
training program.
(c) The following may serve as a basis for removal of qualification
of an FSTD including the withdrawal of approval for use of an FSTD; or
denying an application for a qualification:
(1) An incorrect statement, upon which the FAA relied or could have
relied, made in support of an application for a qualification or a
request for approval for use.
(2) An incorrect entry, upon which the FAA relied or could have
relied, made in any logbook, record, or report that is kept, made, or
used to show compliance with any requirement for an FSTD qualification
or an approval for use.

[[Page 18]]


<r05>
Sec.  60.35  Specific full flight simulator compliance requirements.

(a) No device will be eligible for initial or upgrade qualification
to a FFS at Level C or Level D under this part unless it includes the
equipment and appliances installed and operating to the extent necessary
for the issuance of an airman certificate or rating.
(b) No device will be eligible for initial or upgrade qualification
to a FFS at Level A or Level B under this part unless it includes the
equipment and appliances installed and operating to the extent necessary
for the training, testing, and/or checking that comprise the simulation
portion of the requirements for issuance of an airman certificate or
rating.


<r05>
Sec.  60.37  FSTD qualification on the basis of a Bilateral Aviation
Safety Agreement (BASA).

(a) The evaluation and qualification of an FSTD by a contracting
State to the Convention on International Civil Aviation for the sponsor
of an FSTD located in that contracting State may be used as the basis
for issuing a U.S. statement of qualification (see applicable QPS,
attachment 4, figure 4) by the responsible Flight Standards office to
the sponsor of that FSTD in accordance with--
(1) A BASA between the United States and the Contracting State that
issued the original qualification; and
(2) A Simulator Implementation Procedure (SIP) established under the
BASA.
(b) The SIP must contain any conditions and limitations on
validation and issuance of such qualification by the U.S.

[Docket No. FAA-2002-12461, 71 FR 63426, Oct. 30, 2006, as amended by
Docket No. FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR 75711, Dec. 9, 2022]


<r05>
Sec. Appendix A to Part 60--Qualification Performance Standards for
Airplane Full Flight Simulators

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

This appendix establishes the standards for Airplane FFS evaluation
and qualification. The Flight Standards Service is responsible for the
development, application, and implementation of the standards contained
within this appendix. The procedures and criteria specified in this
appendix will be used by the responsible Flight Standards office, when
conducting airplane FFS evaluations.

Table of Contents

1. Introduction.
2. Applicability (Sec. Sec.  60.1 and 60.2).
3. Definitions (Sec.  60.3).
4. Qualification Performance Standards (Sec.  60.4).
5. Quality Management System (Sec.  60.5).
6. Sponsor Qualification Requirements (Sec.  60.7).
7. Additional Responsibilities of the Sponsor (Sec.  60.9).
8. FFS Use (Sec.  60.11).
9. FFS Objective Data Requirements (Sec.  60.13).
10. Special Equipment and Personnel Requirements for Qualification of
the FFS (Sec.  60.14).
11. Initial (and Upgrade) Qualification Requirements (Sec.  60.15).
12. Additional Qualifications for a Currently Qualified FFS (Sec.
60.16).
13. Previously Qualified FFSs (Sec.  60.17).
14. Inspection, Continuing Qualification Evaluation, and Maintenance
Requirements (Sec.  60.19).
15. Logging FFS Discrepancies (Sec.  60.20).
16. Interim Qualification of FFSs for New Airplane Types or Models
(Sec.  60.21).
17. Modifications to FFSs (Sec.  60.23).
18. Operations With Missing, Malfunctioning, or Inoperative Components
(Sec.  60.25).
19. Automatic Loss of Qualification and Procedures for Restoration of
Qualification (Sec.  60.27).
20. Other Losses of Qualification and Procedures for Restoration of
Qualification (Sec.  60.29).
21. Record Keeping and Reporting (Sec.  60.31).
22. Applications, Logbooks, Reports, and Records: Fraud, Falsification,
or Incorrect Statements (Sec.  60.33).
23. Specific FFS Compliance Requirements (Sec.  60.35).
24. [Reserved]
25. FFS Qualification on the Basis of a Bilateral Aviation Safety
Agreement (BASA) (Sec.  60.37).
Attachment 1 to Appendix A to Part 60--General Simulator Requirements.
Attachment 2 to Appendix A to Part 60--FFS Objective Tests.
Attachment 3 to Appendix A to Part 60--Simulator Subjective Evaluation.
Attachment 4 to Appendix A to Part 60--Sample Documents.
Attachment 5 to Appendix A to Part 60--Simulator Qualification
Requirements for Windshear Training Program Use.
Attachment 6 to Appendix A to Part 60--FSTD Directives Applicable to
Airplane Flight Simulators.

[[Page 19]]

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

1. Introduction

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

a. This appendix contains background information as well as
regulatory and informative material as described later in this section.
To assist the reader in determining what areas are required and what
areas are permissive, the text in this appendix is divided into two
sections: ``QPS Requirements'' and ``Information.'' The QPS Requirements
sections contain details regarding compliance with the part 60 rule
language. These details are regulatory, but are found only in this
appendix. The Information sections contain material that is advisory in
nature, and designed to give the user general information about the
regulation.
b. [Reserved]
c. The responsible Flight Standards office encourages the use of
electronic media for all communication, including any record, report,
request, test, or statement required by this appendix. The electronic
media used must have adequate security provisions and be acceptable to
the responsible Flight Standards office.
d. Related Reading References.
(1) 14 CFR part 60.
(2) 14 CFR part 61.
(3) 14 CFR part 63.
(4) 14 CFR part 119.
(5) 14 CFR part 121.
(6) 14 CFR part 125.
(7) 14 CFR part 135.
(8) 14 CFR part 141.
(9) 14 CFR part 142.
(10) AC 120-28, as amended, Criteria for Approval of Category III
Landing Weather Minima.
(11) AC 120-29, as amended, Criteria for Approving Category I and
Category II Landing Minima for part 121 operators.
(12) AC 120-35, as amended, Flightcrew Member, Line Operational
Simulations: Line-Oriented Flight Training, Special Purpose Operational
Training, Line Operational Evaluation.
(13) AC 120-40, as amended, Airplane Simulator Qualification.
(14) AC 120-41, as amended, Criteria for Operational Approval of
Airborne Wind Shear Alerting and Flight Guidance Systems.
(15) AC 120-57, as amended, Surface Movement Guidance and Control
System (SMGCS).
(16) AC 150/5300-13, as amended, Airport Design.
(17) AC 150/5340-1, as amended, Standards for Airport Markings.
(18) AC 150/5340-4, as amended, Installation Details for Runway
Centerline Touchdown Zone Lighting Systems.
(19) AC 150/5340-19, as amended, Taxiway Centerline Lighting System.
(20) AC 150/5340-24, as amended, Runway and Taxiway Edge Lighting
System.
(21) AC 150/5345-28, as amended, Precision Approach Path Indicator
(PAPI) Systems.
(22) International Air Transport Association document, ``Flight
Simulation Training Device Design and Performance Data Requirements,''
as amended.
(23) AC 25-7, as amended, Flight Test Guide for Certification of
Transport Category Airplanes.
(24) AC 23-8, as amended, Flight Test Guide for Certification of
Part 23 Airplanes.
(25) International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Manual of
Criteria for the Qualification of Flight Simulation Training Devices, as
amended.
(26) Aeroplane Flight Simulation Training Device Evaluation
Handbook, Volume I, as amended and Volume II, as amended, The Royal
Aeronautical Society, London, UK.
(27) FAA Airman Certification Standards and Practical Test Standards
for Airline Transport Pilot, Type Ratings, Commercial Pilot, and
Instrument Ratings
(28) The FAA Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM). An electronic
version of the AIM is on the Internet at http://www.faa.gov/atpubs.
(29) Aeronautical Radio, Inc. (ARINC) document number 436, titled
Guidelines For Electronic Qualification Test Guide (as amended).
(30) Aeronautical Radio, Inc. (ARINC) document 610, Guidance for
Design and Integration of Aircraft Avionics Equipment in Simulators (as
amended).

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

2. Applicability (Sec. Sec.  60.1 and 60.2)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.1, Applicability, or to Sec.  60.2, Applicability of sponsor rules to
persons who are not sponsors and who are engaged in certain unauthorized
activities.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

3. Definitions (Sec.  60.3)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

See Appendix F of this part for a list of definitions and
abbreviations from part 1 and

[[Page 20]]

part 60, including the appropriate appendices of part 60.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

4. Qualification Performance Standards (Sec.  60.4)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.4, Qualification Performance Standards.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

5. Quality Management System (Sec.  60.5)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

See Appendix E of this part for additional regulatory and
informational material regarding Quality Management Systems.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

6. Sponsor Qualification Requirements (Sec.  60.7)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

a. The intent of the language in Sec.  60.7(b) is to have a specific
FFS, identified by the sponsor, used at least once in an FAA-approved
flight training program for the airplane simulated during the 12-month
period described. The identification of the specific FFS may change from
one 12-month period to the next 12-month period as long as the sponsor
sponsors and uses at least one FFS at least once during the prescribed
period. No minimum number of hours or minimum FFS periods are required.
b. The following examples describe acceptable operational practices:
(1) Example One.
(a) A sponsor is sponsoring a single, specific FFS for its own use,
in its own facility or elsewhere--this single FFS forms the basis for
the sponsorship. The sponsor uses that FFS at least once in each 12-
month period in the sponsor's FAA-approved flight training program for
the airplane simulated. This 12-month period is established according to
the following schedule:
(i) If the FFS was qualified prior to May 30, 2008, the 12-month
period begins on the date of the first continuing qualification
evaluation conducted in accordance with Sec.  60.19 after May 30, 2008,
and continues for each subsequent 12-month period;
(ii) A device qualified on or after May 30, 2008, will be required
to undergo an initial or upgrade evaluation in accordance with Sec.
60.15. Once the initial or upgrade evaluation is complete, the first
continuing qualification evaluation will be conducted within 6 months.
The 12-month continuing qualification evaluation cycle begins on that
date and continues for each subsequent 12-month period.
(b) There is no minimum number of hours of FFS use required.
(c) The identification of the specific FFS may change from one 12-
month period to the next 12-month period as long as the sponsor sponsors
and uses at least one FFS at least once during the prescribed period.
(2) Example Two.
(a) A sponsor sponsors an additional number of FFSs, in its facility
or elsewhere. Each additionally sponsored FFS must be--
(i) Used by the sponsor in the sponsor's FAA-approved flight
training program for the airplane simulated (as described in Sec.
60.7(d)(1));
OR
(ii) Used by another FAA certificate holder in that other
certificate holder's FAA-approved flight training program for the
airplane simulated (as described in Sec.  60.7(d)(1)). This 12-month
period is established in the same manner as in example one;
OR
(iii) Provided a statement each year from a qualified pilot (after
having flown the airplane, not the subject FFS or another FFS, during
the preceding 12-month period), stating that the subject FFS's
performance and handling qualities represent the airplane (as described
in Sec.  60.7(d)(2)). This statement is provided at least once in each
12-month period established in the same manner as in example one.
(b) No minimum number of hours of FFS use is required.
(3) Example Three.
(a) A sponsor in New York (in this example, a Part 142 certificate
holder) establishes ``satellite'' training centers in Chicago and
Moscow.
(b) The satellite function means that the Chicago and Moscow centers
must operate under the New York center's certificate (in accordance with
all of the New York center's practices, procedures, and policies; e.g.,
instructor and/or technician training/checking requirements, record
keeping, QMS program).
(c) All of the FFSs in the Chicago and Moscow centers could be dry-
leased (i.e., the certificate holder does not have and use FAA-approved
flight training programs for the FFSs in the Chicago and Moscow centers)
because--
(i) Each FFS in the Chicago center and each FFS in the Moscow center
is used at least once each 12-month period by another

[[Page 21]]

FAA certificate holder in that other certificate holder's FAA-approved
flight training program for the airplane (as described in Sec.
60.7(d)(1));
OR
(ii) A statement is obtained from a qualified pilot (having flown
the airplane, not the subject FFS or another FFS, during the preceding
12-month period) stating that the performance and handling qualities of
each FFS in the Chicago and Moscow centers represents the airplane (as
described in Sec.  60.7(d)(2)).

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

7. Additional Responsibilities of the Sponsor (Sec.  60.9)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

The phrase ``as soon as practicable'' in Sec.  60.9(a) means without
unnecessarily disrupting or delaying beyond a reasonable time the
training, evaluation, or experience being conducted in the FFS.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

8. FFS Use (Sec.  60.11)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.11, Simulator Use.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

9. FFS Objective Data Requirements (Sec.  60.13)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

a. Flight test data used to validate FFS performance and handling
qualities must have been gathered in accordance with a flight test
program containing the following:
(1) A flight test plan consisting of:
(a) The maneuvers and procedures required for aircraft certification
and simulation programming and validation.
(b) For each maneuver or procedure--
(i) The procedures and control input the flight test pilot and/or
engineer used.
(ii) The atmospheric and environmental conditions.
(iii) The initial flight conditions.
(iv) The airplane configuration, including weight and center of
gravity.
(v) The data to be gathered.
(vi) All other information necessary to recreate the flight test
conditions in the FFS.
(2) Appropriately qualified flight test personnel.
(3) An understanding of the accuracy of the data to be gathered
using appropriate alternative data sources, procedures, and
instrumentation that is traceable to a recognized standard as described
in Attachment 2, Table A2E of this appendix.
(4) Appropriate and sufficient data acquisition equipment or
system(s), including appropriate data reduction and analysis methods and
techniques, as would be acceptable to the FAA's Aircraft Certification
Service.
b. The data, regardless of source, must be presented as follows:
(1) In a format that supports the FFS validation process.
(2) In a manner that is clearly readable and annotated correctly and
completely.
(3) With resolution sufficient to determine compliance with the
tolerances set forth in Attachment 2, Table A2A of this appendix.
(4) With any necessary instructions or other details provided, such
as yaw damper or throttle position.
(5) Without alteration, adjustments, or bias. Data may be corrected
to address known data calibration errors provided that an explanation of
the methods used to correct the errors appears in the QTG. The corrected
data may be re-scaled, digitized, or otherwise manipulated to fit the
desired presentation.
c. After completion of any additional flight test, a flight test
report must be submitted in support of the validation data. The report
must contain sufficient data and rationale to support qualification of
the FFS at the level requested.
d. As required by Sec.  60.13(f), the sponsor must notify the
responsible Flight Standards office when it becomes aware that an
addition to, an amendment to, or a revision of data that may relate to
FFS performance or handling characteristics is available. The data
referred to in this paragraph is data used to validate the performance,
handling qualities, or other characteristics of the aircraft, including
data related to any relevant changes occurring after the type
certificate was issued. The sponsor must--
(1) Within 10 calendar days, notify the responsible Flight Standards
office of the existence of this data; and
(2) Within 45 calendar days, notify the responsible Flight Standards
office of--
(a) The schedule to incorporate this data into the FFS; or
(b) The reason for not incorporating this data into the FFS.
e. In those cases where the objective test results authorize a
``snapshot test'' or a ``series of snapshot tests'' results in lieu of a
time-history result, the sponsor or other

[[Page 22]]

data provider must ensure that a steady state condition exists at the
instant of time captured by the ``snapshot.'' The steady state condition
must exist from 4 seconds prior to, through 1 second following, the
instant of time captured by the snapshot.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

f. The FFS sponsor is encouraged to maintain a liaison with the
manufacturer of the aircraft being simulated (or with the holder of the
aircraft type certificate for the aircraft being simulated if the
manufacturer is no longer in business), and, if appropriate, with the
person having supplied the aircraft data package for the FFS in order to
facilitate the notification required by Sec.  60.13(f).
g. It is the intent of the responsible Flight Standards office that
for new aircraft entering service, at a point well in advance of
preparation of the Qualification Test Guide (QTG), the sponsor should
submit to the responsible Flight Standards office for approval, a
descriptive document (see Table A2C, Sample Validation Data Roadmap for
Airplanes) containing the plan for acquiring the validation data,
including data sources. This document should clearly identify sources of
data for all required tests, a description of the validity of these data
for a specific engine type and thrust rating configuration, and the
revision levels of all avionics affecting the performance or flying
qualities of the aircraft. Additionally, this document should provide
other information, such as the rationale or explanation for cases where
data or data parameters are missing, instances where engineering
simulation data are used or where flight test methods require further
explanations. It should also provide a brief narrative describing the
cause and effect of any deviation from data requirements. The aircraft
manufacturer may provide this document.
h. There is no requirement for any flight test data supplier to
submit a flight test plan or program prior to gathering flight test
data. However, the responsible Flight Standards office notes that
inexperienced data gatherers often provide data that is irrelevant,
improperly marked, or lacking adequate justification for selection.
Other problems include inadequate information regarding initial
conditions or test maneuvers. The responsible Flight Standards office
has been forced to refuse these data submissions as validation data for
an FFS evaluation. It is for this reason that the responsible Flight
Standards office recommends that any data supplier not previously
experienced in this area review the data necessary for programming and
for validating the performance of the FFS, and discuss the flight test
plan anticipated for acquiring such data with the responsible Flight
Standards office well in advance of commencing the flight tests.
i. The responsible Flight Standards office will consider, on a case-
by-case basis, whether to approve supplemental validation data derived
from flight data recording systems, such as a Quick Access Recorder or
Flight Data Recorder.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

10. Special Equipment and Personnel Requirements for Qualification of
the FFSs (Sec.  60.14)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

a. In the event that the responsible Flight Standards office
determines that special equipment or specifically qualified persons will
be required to conduct an evaluation, the responsible Flight Standards
office will make every attempt to notify the sponsor at least one (1)
week, but in no case less than 72 hours, in advance of the evaluation.
Examples of special equipment include spot photometers, flight control
measurement devices, and sound analyzers. Examples of specially
qualified personnel include individuals specifically qualified to
install or use any special equipment when its use is required.
b. Examples of a special evaluation include an evaluation conducted
after an FFS is moved, at the request of the TPAA, or as a result of
comments received from users of the FFS that raise questions about the
continued qualification or use of the FFS.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

11. Initial (and Upgrade) Qualification Requirements (Sec.  60.15)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

a. In order to be qualified at a particular qualification level, the
FFS must:
(1) Meet the general requirements listed in Attachment 1 of this
appendix;
(2) Meet the objective testing requirements listed in Attachment 2
of this appendix; and
(3) Satisfactorily accomplish the subjective tests listed in
Attachment 3 of this appendix.
b. The request described in Sec.  60.15(a) must include all of the
following:
(1) A statement that the FFS meets all of the applicable provisions
of this part and all applicable provisions of the QPS.
(2) Unless otherwise authorized through prior coordination with the
responsible Flight Standards office, a confirmation that

[[Page 23]]

the sponsor will forward to the responsible Flight Standards office the
statement described in Sec.  60.15(b) in such time as to be received no
later than 5 business days prior to the scheduled evaluation and may be
forwarded to the responsible Flight Standards office via traditional or
electronic means.
(3) A QTG, acceptable to the responsible Flight Standards office,
that includes all of the following:
(a) Objective data obtained from traditional aircraft testing or
another approved source.
(b) Correlating objective test results obtained from the performance
of the FFS as prescribed in the appropriate QPS.
(c) The result of FFS subjective tests prescribed in the appropriate
QPS.
(d) A description of the equipment necessary to perform the
evaluation for initial qualification and the continuing qualification
evaluations.
c. The QTG described in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, must
provide the documented proof of compliance with the simulator objective
tests in Attachment 2, Table A2A of this appendix.
d. The QTG is prepared and submitted by the sponsor, or the
sponsor's agent on behalf of the sponsor, to the responsible Flight
Standards office for review and approval, and must include, for each
objective test:
(1) Parameters, tolerances, and flight conditions;
(2) Pertinent and complete instructions for the conduct of automatic
and manual tests;
(3) A means of comparing the FFS test results to the objective data;
(4) Any other information as necessary, to assist in the evaluation
of the test results;
(5) Other information appropriate to the qualification level of the
FFS.
e. The QTG described in paragraphs (a)(3) and (b) of this section,
must include the following:
(1) A QTG cover page with sponsor and FAA approval signature blocks
(see Attachment 4, Figure A4C, of this appendix for a sample QTG cover
page).
(2) [Reserved]
(3) An FFS information page that provides the information listed in
this paragraph (see Attachment 4, Figure A4B, of this appendix for a
sample FFS information page). For convertible FFSs, the sponsor must
submit a separate page for each configuration of the FFS.
(a) The sponsor's FFS identification number or code.
(b) The airplane model and series being simulated.
(c) The aerodynamic data revision number or reference.
(d) The source of the basic aerodynamic model and the aerodynamic
coefficient data used to modify the basic model.
(e) The engine model(s) and its data revision number or reference.
(f) The flight control data revision number or reference.
(g) The flight management system identification and revision level.
(h) The FFS model and manufacturer.
(i) The date of FFS manufacture.
(j) The FFS computer identification.
(k) The visual system model and manufacturer, including display
type.
(l) The motion system type and manufacturer, including degrees of
freedom.
(4) A Table of Contents.
(5) A log of revisions and a list of effective pages.
(6) A list of all relevant data references.
(7) A glossary of terms and symbols used (including sign conventions
and units).
(8) Statements of Compliance and Capability (SOCs) with certain
requirements.
(9) Recording procedures or equipment required to accomplish the
objective tests.
(10) The following information for each objective test designated in
Attachment 2, Table A2A, of this appendix as applicable to the
qualification level sought:
(a) Name of the test.
(b) Objective of the test.
(c) Initial conditions.
(d) Manual test procedures.
(e) Automatic test procedures (if applicable).
(f) Method for evaluating FFS objective test results.
(g) List of all relevant parameters driven or constrained during the
automatically conducted test(s).
(h) List of all relevant parameters driven or constrained during the
manually conducted test(s).
(i) Tolerances for relevant parameters.
(j) Source of Validation Data (document and page number).
(k) Copy of the Validation Data (if located in a separate binder, a
cross reference for the identification and page number for pertinent
data location must be provided).
(l) Simulator Objective Test Results as obtained by the sponsor.
Each test result must reflect the date completed and must be clearly
labeled as a product of the device being tested.
f. A convertible FFS is addressed as a separate FFS for each model
and series airplane to which it will be converted and for the FAA
qualification level sought. If a sponsor seeks qualification for two or
more models of an airplane type using a convertible FFS, the sponsor
must submit a QTG for each airplane model, or a QTG for the first
airplane model and a supplement to that QTG for each additional airplane
model. The responsible Flight Standards office will conduct evaluations
for each airplane model.
g. Form and manner of presentation of objective test results in the
QTG:

[[Page 24]]

(1) The sponsor's FFS test results must be recorded in a manner
acceptable to the responsible Flight Standards office, that allows easy
comparison of the FFS test results to the validation data (e.g., use of
a multi-channel recorder, line printer, cross plotting, overlays,
transparencies).
(2) FFS results must be labeled using terminology common to airplane
parameters as opposed to computer software identifications.
(3) Validation data documents included in a QTG may be
photographically reduced only if such reduction will not alter the
graphic scaling or cause difficulties in scale interpretation or
resolution.
(4) Scaling on graphical presentations must provide the resolution
necessary to evaluate the parameters shown in Attachment 2, Table A2A of
this appendix.
(5) Tests involving time histories, data sheets (or transparencies
thereof) and FFS test results must be clearly marked with appropriate
reference points to ensure an accurate comparison between the FFS and
the airplane with respect to time. Time histories recorded via a line
printer are to be clearly identified for cross plotting on the airplane
data. Over-plots must not obscure the reference data.
h. The sponsor may elect to complete the QTG objective and
subjective tests at the manufacturer's facility or at the sponsor's
training facility (or other sponsor designated location where training
will take place). If the tests are conducted at the manufacturer's
facility, the sponsor must repeat at least one-third of the tests at the
sponsor's training facility in order to substantiate FFS performance.
The QTG must be clearly annotated to indicate when and where each test
was accomplished. Tests conducted at the manufacturer's facility and at
the sponsor's designated training facility must be conducted after the
FFS is assembled with systems and sub-systems functional and operating
in an interactive manner. The test results must be submitted to the
responsible Flight Standards office.
i. The sponsor must maintain a copy of the MQTG at the FFS location.
j. All FFSs for which the initial qualification is conducted after
May 30, 2014, must have an electronic MQTG (eMQTG) including all
objective data obtained from airplane testing, or another approved
source (reformatted or digitized), together with correlating objective
test results obtained from the performance of the FFS (reformatted or
digitized) as prescribed in this appendix. The eMQTG must also contain
the general FFS performance or demonstration results (reformatted or
digitized) prescribed in this appendix, and a description of the
equipment necessary to perform the initial qualification evaluation and
the continuing qualification evaluations. The eMQTG must include the
original validation data used to validate FFS performance and handling
qualities in either the original digitized format from the data supplier
or an electronic scan of the original time-history plots that were
provided by the data supplier. A copy of the eMQTG must be provided to
the responsible Flight Standards office.
k. All other FFSs not covered in subparagraph ``j'' must have an
electronic copy of the MQTG by May 30, 2014. An electronic copy of the
MQTG must be provided to the responsible Flight Standards office. This
may be provided by an electronic scan presented in a Portable Document
File (PDF), or similar format acceptable to the responsible Flight
Standards office.
l. During the initial (or upgrade) qualification evaluation
conducted by the responsible Flight Standards office, the sponsor must
also provide a person who is a user of the device (e.g., a qualified
pilot or instructor pilot with flight time experience in that aircraft)
and knowledgeable about the operation of the aircraft and the operation
of the FFS.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

m. Only those FFSs that are sponsored by a certificate holder as
defined in Appendix F of this part will be evaluated by the responsible
Flight Standards office. However, other FFS evaluations may be conducted
on a case-by-case basis as the Administrator deems appropriate, but only
in accordance with applicable agreements.
n. The responsible Flight Standards office will conduct an
evaluation for each configuration, and each FFS must be evaluated as
completely as possible. To ensure a thorough and uniform evaluation,
each FFS is subjected to the general simulator requirements in
Attachment 1 of this appendix, the objective tests listed in Attachment
2 of this appendix, and the subjective tests listed in Attachment 3 of
this appendix. The evaluations described herein will include, but not
necessarily be limited to the following:
(1) Airplane responses, including longitudinal and lateral-
directional control responses (see Attachment 2 of this appendix);
(2) Performance in authorized portions of the simulated airplane's
operating envelope, to include tasks evaluated by the responsible Flight
Standards office in the areas of surface operations, takeoff, climb,
cruise, descent, approach, and landing as well as abnormal and emergency
operations (see Attachment 2 of this appendix);
(3) Control checks (see Attachment 1 and Attachment 2 of this
appendix);
(4) Flight deck configuration (see Attachment 1 of this appendix);

[[Page 25]]

(5) Pilot, flight engineer, and instructor station functions checks
(see Attachment 1 and Attachment 3 of this appendix);
(6) Airplane systems and sub-systems (as appropriate) as compared to
the airplane simulated (see Attachment 1 and Attachment 3 of this
appendix);
(7) FFS systems and sub-systems, including force cueing (motion),
visual, and aural (sound) systems, as appropriate (see Attachment 1 and
Attachment 2 of this appendix); and
(8) Certain additional requirements, depending upon the
qualification level sought, including equipment or circumstances that
may become hazardous to the occupants. The sponsor may be subject to
Occupational Safety and Health Administration requirements.
o. The responsible Flight Standards office administers the objective
and subjective tests, which includes an examination of functions. The
tests include a qualitative assessment of the FFS by a pilot from the
responsible Flight Standards office. The evaluation team leader may
assign other qualified personnel to assist in accomplishing the
functions examination and/or the objective and subjective tests
performed during an evaluation when required.
(1) Objective tests provide a basis for measuring and evaluating FFS
performance and determining compliance with the requirements of this
part.
(2) Subjective tests provide a basis for:
(a) Evaluating the capability of the FFS to perform over a typical
utilization period;
(b) Determining that the FFS satisfactorily simulates each required
task;
(c) Verifying correct operation of the FFS controls, instruments,
and systems; and
(d) Demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this part.
p. The tolerances for the test parameters listed in Attachment 2 of
this appendix reflect the range of tolerances acceptable to the
responsible Flight Standards office for FFS validation and are not to be
confused with design tolerances specified for FFS manufacture. In making
decisions regarding tests and test results, the responsible Flight
Standards office relies on the use of operational and engineering
judgment in the application of data (including consideration of the way
in which the flight test was flown and the way the data was gathered and
applied), data presentations, and the applicable tolerances for each
test.
q. In addition to the scheduled continuing qualification evaluation,
each FFS is subject to evaluations conducted by the responsible Flight
Standards office at any time without prior notification to the sponsor.
Such evaluations would be accomplished in a normal manner (i.e.,
requiring exclusive use of the FFS for the conduct of objective and
subjective tests and an examination of functions) if the FFS is not
being used for flight crewmember training, testing, or checking.
However, if the FFS were being used, the evaluation would be conducted
in a non-exclusive manner. This non-exclusive evaluation will be
conducted by the FFS evaluator accompanying the check airman,
instructor, Aircrew Program Designee (APD), or FAA inspector aboard the
FFS along with the student(s) and observing the operation of the FFS
during the training, testing, or checking activities.
r. Problems with objective test results are handled as follows:
(1) If a problem with an objective test result is detected by the
evaluation team during an evaluation, the test may be repeated or the
QTG may be amended.
(2) If it is determined that the results of an objective test do not
support the level requested but do support a lower level, the
responsible Flight Standards office may qualify the FFS at that lower
level. For example, if a Level D evaluation is requested and the FFS
fails to meet sound test tolerances, it could be qualified at Level C.
s. After an FFS is successfully evaluated, the responsible Flight
Standards office issues a Statement of Qualification (SOQ) to the
sponsor. The responsible Flight Standards office recommends the FFS to
the TPAA, who will approve the FFS for use in a flight training program.
The SOQ will be issued at the satisfactory conclusion of the initial or
continuing qualification evaluation and will list the tasks for which
the FFS is qualified, referencing the tasks described in Table A1B in
Attachment 1 of this appendix. However, it is the sponsor's
responsibility to obtain TPAA approval prior to using the FFS in an FAA-
approved flight training program.
t. Under normal circumstances, the responsible Flight Standards
office establishes a date for the initial or upgrade evaluation within
ten (10) working days after determining that a complete QTG is
acceptable. Unusual circumstances may warrant establishing an evaluation
date before this determination is made. A sponsor may schedule an
evaluation date as early as 6 months in advance. However, there may be a
delay of 45 days or more in rescheduling and completing the evaluation
if the sponsor is unable to meet the scheduled date. See Attachment 4 of
this appendix, Figure A4A, Sample Request for Initial, Upgrade, or
Reinstatement Evaluation.
u. The numbering system used for objective test results in the QTG
should closely follow the numbering system set out in Attachment 2 of
this appendix, FFS Objective Tests, Table A2A.
v. Contact the responsible Flight Standards office for additional
information regarding the preferred qualifications of pilots used to
meet the requirements of Sec.  60.15(d).

[[Page 26]]

w. Examples of the exclusions for which the FFS might not have been
subjectively tested by the sponsor or the responsible Flight Standards
office and for which qualification might not be sought or granted, as
described in Sec.  60.15(g)(6), include windshear training and circling
approaches.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

12. Additional Qualifications for a Currently Qualified FFS (Sec.
60.16)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.16, Additional Qualifications for a Currently Qualified FFS.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

13. Previously Qualified FFSs (Sec.  60.17)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

a. In instances where a sponsor plans to remove an FFS from active
status for a period of less than two years, the following procedures
apply:
(1) The responsible Flight Standards office must be notified in
writing and the notification must include an estimate of the period that
the FFS will be inactive;
(2) Continuing Qualification evaluations will not be scheduled
during the inactive period;
(3) The responsible Flight Standards office will remove the FFS from
the list of qualified FSTDs on a mutually established date not later
than the date on which the first missed continuing qualification
evaluation would have been scheduled;
(4) Before the FFS is restored to qualified status, it must be
evaluated by the responsible Flight Standards office. The evaluation
content and the time required to accomplish the evaluation is based on
the number of continuing qualification evaluations and sponsor-conducted
quarterly inspections missed during the period of inactivity.
(5) The sponsor must notify the responsible Flight Standards office
of any changes to the original scheduled time out of service;
b. Simulators qualified prior to May 31, 2016, are not required to
meet the general simulation requirements, the objective test
requirements or the subjective test requirements of attachments 1, 2,
and 3 of this appendix as long as the simulator continues to meet the
test requirements contained in the MQTG developed under the original
qualification basis.
c. After May 30, 2009, each visual scene or airport model beyond the
minimum required for the FFS qualification level that is installed in
and available for use in a qualified FFS must meet the requirements
described in attachment 3 of this appendix.
d. Simulators qualified prior to May 31, 2016, may be updated. If an
evaluation is deemed appropriate or necessary by the responsible Flight
Standards office after such an update, the evaluation will not require
an evaluation to standards beyond those against which the simulator was
originally qualified.
e. Other certificate holders or persons desiring to use an FFS may
contract with FFS sponsors to use FFSs previously qualified at a
particular level for an airplane type and approved for use within an
FAA-approved flight training program. Such FFSs are not required to
undergo an additional qualification process, except as described in
Sec.  60.16.
f. Each FFS user must obtain approval from the appropriate TPAA to
use any FFS in an FAA-approved flight training program.
g. The intent of the requirement listed in Sec.  60.17(b), for each
FFS to have a SOQ within 6 years, is to have the availability of that
statement (including the configuration list and the limitations to
authorizations) to provide a complete picture of the FFS inventory
regulated by the FAA. The issuance of the statement will not require any
additional evaluation or require any adjustment to the evaluation basis
for the FFS.
h. Downgrading of an FFS is a permanent change in qualification
level and will necessitate the issuance of a revised SOQ to reflect the
revised qualification level, as appropriate. If a temporary restriction
is placed on an FFS because of a missing, malfunctioning, or inoperative
component or on-going repairs, the restriction is not a permanent change
in qualification level. Instead, the restriction is temporary and is
removed when the reason for the restriction has been resolved.
i. The responsible Flight Standards office will determine the
evaluation criteria for an FFS that has been removed from active status.
The criteria will be based on the number of continuing qualification
evaluations and quarterly inspections missed during the period of
inactivity. For example, if the FFS were out of service for a 1 year
period, it would be necessary to complete the entire QTG, since all of
the quarterly evaluations would have been missed. The responsible Flight
Standards office will also consider how the FFS was stored, whether
parts were removed from the FFS and whether the FFS was disassembled.
j. The FFS will normally be requalified using the FAA-approved MQTG
and the criteria that was in effect prior to its removal from
qualification. However, inactive periods

[[Page 27]]

of 2 years or more will require requalification under the standards in
effect and current at the time of requalification.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

14. Inspection, Continuing Qualification Evaluation, and Maintenance
Requirements (Sec.  60.19)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

a. The sponsor must conduct a minimum of four evenly spaced
inspections throughout the year. The objective test sequence and content
of each inspection must be developed by the sponsor and must be
acceptable to the responsible Flight Standards office.
b. The description of the functional preflight check must be
contained in the sponsor's QMS.
c. Record ``functional preflight'' in the FFS discrepancy log book
or other acceptable location, including any item found to be missing,
malfunctioning, or inoperative.
d. During the continuing qualification evaluation conducted by the
responsible Flight Standards office, the sponsor must also provide a
person knowledgeable about the operation of the aircraft and the
operation of the FFS.
e. The responsible Flight Standards office will conduct continuing
qualification evaluations every 12 months unless:
(1) The responsible Flight Standards office becomes aware of
discrepancies or performance problems with the device that warrants more
frequent evaluations; or
(2) The sponsor implements a QMS that justifies less frequent
evaluations. However, in no case shall the frequency of a continuing
qualification evaluation exceed 36 months.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

f. The sponsor's test sequence and the content of each quarterly
inspection required in Sec.  60.19(a)(1) should include a balance and a
mix from the objective test requirement areas listed as follows:
(1) Performance.
(2) Handling qualities.
(3) Motion system (where appropriate).
(4) Visual system (where appropriate).
(5) Sound system (where appropriate).
(6) Other FFS systems.
g. If the evaluator plans to accomplish specific tests during a
normal continuing qualification evaluation that requires the use of
special equipment or technicians, the sponsor will be notified as far in
advance of the evaluation as practical; but not less than 72 hours.
Examples of such tests include latencies, control dynamics, sounds and
vibrations, motion, and/or some visual system tests.
h. The continuing qualification evaluations, described in Sec.
60.19(b), will normally require 4 hours of FFS time. However,
flexibility is necessary to address abnormal situations or situations
involving aircraft with additional levels of complexity (e.g., computer
controlled aircraft). The sponsor should anticipate that some tests may
require additional time. The continuing qualification evaluations will
consist of the following:
(1) Review of the results of the quarterly inspections conducted by
the sponsor since the last scheduled continuing qualification
evaluation.
(2) A selection of approximately 8 to 15 objective tests from the
MQTG that provide an adequate opportunity to evaluate the performance of
the FFS. The tests chosen will be performed either automatically or
manually and should be able to be conducted within approximately one-
third (\1/3\) of the allotted FFS time.
(3) A subjective evaluation of the FFS to perform a representative
sampling of the tasks set out in attachment 3 of this appendix. This
portion of the evaluation should take approximately two-thirds (\2/3\)
of the allotted FFS time.
(4) An examination of the functions of the FFS may include the
motion system, visual system, sound system, instructor operating
station, and the normal functions and simulated malfunctions of the
airplane systems. This examination is normally accomplished
simultaneously with the subjective evaluation requirements.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

15. Logging FFS Discrepancies (Sec.  60.20)

Begin Information

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.20. Logging FFS Discrepancies.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

16. Interim Qualification of FFSs for New Airplane Types or Models
(Sec.  60.21)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.21, Interim Qualification of FFSs for New Airplane Types or Models.

[[Page 28]]

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

17. Modifications to FFSs (Sec.  60.23)

Begin QPS Requirements

a. The notification described in Sec.  60.23(c)(2) must include a
complete description of the planned modification, with a description of
the operational and engineering effect the proposed modification will
have on the operation of the FFS and the results that are expected with
the modification incorporated.
b. Prior to using the modified FFS:
(1) All the applicable objective tests completed with the
modification incorporated, including any necessary updates to the MQTG
(e.g., accomplishment of FSTD Directives) must be acceptable to the
responsible Flight Standards office; and
(2) The sponsor must provide the responsible Flight Standards office
with a statement signed by the MR that the factors listed in Sec.
60.15(b) are addressed by the appropriate personnel as described in that
section.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

FSTD Directives are considered modifications of an FFS. See
Attachment 4 of this appendix for a sample index of effective FSTD
Directives. See Attachment 6 of this appendix for a list of all
effective FSTD Directives applicable to Airplane FFSs.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

18. Operation with Missing, Malfunctioning, or Inoperative Components
(Sec.  60.25)

Begin Information

a. The sponsor's responsibility with respect to Sec.  60.25(a) is
satisfied when the sponsor fairly and accurately advises the user of the
current status of an FFS, including any missing, malfunctioning, or
inoperative (MMI) component(s).
b. It is the responsibility of the instructor, check airman, or
representative of the administrator conducting training, testing, or
checking to exercise reasonable and prudent judgment to determine if any
MMI component is necessary for the satisfactory completion of a specific
maneuver, procedure, or task.
c. If the 29th or 30th day of the 30-day period described in Sec.
60.25(b) is on a Saturday, a Sunday, or a holiday, the FAA will extend
the deadline until the next business day.
d. In accordance with the authorization described in Sec.  60.25(b),
the sponsor may develop a discrepancy prioritizing system to accomplish
repairs based on the level of impact on the capability of the FFS.
Repairs having a larger impact on FFS capability to provide the required
training, evaluation, or flight experience will have a higher priority
for repair or replacement.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

19. Automatic Loss of Qualification and Procedures for Restoration of
Qualification (Sec.  60.27)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

If the sponsor provides a plan for how the FFS will be maintained
during its out-of-service period (e.g., periodic exercise of mechanical,
hydraulic, and electrical systems; routine replacement of hydraulic
fluid; control of the environmental factors in which the FFS is to be
maintained) there is a greater likelihood that the responsible Flight
Standards office will be able to determine the amount of testing
required for requalification.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

20. Other Losses of Qualification and Procedures for Restoration of
Qualification (Sec.  60.29)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

If the sponsor provides a plan for how the FFS will be maintained
during its out-of-service period (e.g., periodic exercise of mechanical,
hydraulic, and electrical systems; routine replacement of hydraulic
fluid; control of the environmental factors in which the FFS is to be
maintained) there is a greater likelihood that the responsible Flight
Standards office will be able to determine the amount of testing
required for requalification.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

21. Recordkeeping and Reporting (Sec.  60.31)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

a. FFS modifications can include hardware or software changes. For
FFS modifications involving software programming changes, the record
required by Sec.  60.31(a)(2) must consist of the name of the aircraft
system software, aerodynamic model, or engine model change, the date of
the change, a summary of the change, and the reason for the change.

[[Page 29]]

b. If a coded form for record keeping is used, it must provide for
the preservation and retrieval of information with appropriate security
or controls to prevent the inappropriate alteration of such records
after the fact.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

22. Applications, Logbooks, Reports, and Records: Fraud, Falsification,
or Incorrect Statements (Sec.  60.33)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.33, Applications, Logbooks, Reports, and Records: Fraud,
Falsification, or Incorrect Statements.

23. Specific FFS Compliance Requirements (Sec.  60.35)

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.35, Specific FFS Compliance Requirements.

24. [Reserved]

25. FFS Qualification on the Basis of a Bilateral Aviation Safety
Agreement (BASA) (Sec.  60.37)

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.37, FFS Qualification on the Basis of a Bilateral Aviation Safety
Agreement (BASA).

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

Attachment 1 to Appendix A to Part 60--General Simulator Requirements

Begin QPS Requirements

1. Requirements

a. Certain requirements included in this appendix must be supported
with an SOC as defined in Appendix F, which may include objective and
subjective tests. The requirements for SOCs are indicated in the
``General Simulator Requirements'' column in Table A1A of this appendix.
b. Table A1A describes the requirements for the indicated level of
FFS. Many devices include operational systems or functions that exceed
the requirements outlined in this section. However, all systems will be
tested and evaluated in accordance with this appendix to ensure proper
operation.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

2. Discussion

a. This attachment describes the general simulator requirements for
qualifying an airplane FFS. The sponsor should also consult the
objective tests in Attachment 2 of this appendix and the examination of
functions and subjective tests listed in Attachment 3 of this appendix
to determine the complete requirements for a specific level simulator.
b. The material contained in this attachment is divided into the
following categories:
(1) General flight deck configuration.
(2) Simulator programming.
(3) Equipment operation.
(4) Equipment and facilities for instructor/evaluator functions.
(5) Motion system.
(6) Visual system.
(7) Sound system.
c. Table A1A provides the standards for the General Simulator
Requirements.
d. Table A1B provides the tasks that the sponsor will examine to
determine whether the FFS satisfactorily meets the requirements for
flight crew training, testing, and experience, and provides the tasks
for which the simulator may be qualified.
e. Table A1C provides the functions that an instructor/check airman
must be able to control in the simulator.
f. It is not required that all of the tasks that appear on the List
of Qualified Tasks (part of the SOQ) be accomplished during the initial
or continuing qualification evaluation.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

[[Page 30]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.000


[[Page 31]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.001


[[Page 32]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.002


[[Page 33]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.003


[[Page 34]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.004


[[Page 35]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.005


[[Page 36]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.006


[[Page 37]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.007


[[Page 38]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.008


[[Page 39]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.009


[[Page 40]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.010


[[Page 41]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.011


[[Page 42]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.012


[[Page 43]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.013


[[Page 44]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.014


[[Page 45]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.015


[[Page 46]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.016


[[Page 47]]



Table A1B--Table of Tasks vs. Simulator Level
------------------------------------------------------------------------
QPS requirements                        Information
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subjective        Simulator levels
requirements In order --------------------
to be qualified at
the simulator
qualification level
indicated, the
Entry No.     simulator must be                              Notes
able to perform at    A    B    C    D
least the tasks
associated with that
level of
qualification.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Preflight Procedures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.a........  Preflight Inspection    X    X    X    X
(flight deck only).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.b........  Engine Start.........   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.c........  Taxiing..............        R    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.d........  Pre-takeoff Checks...   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Takeoff and Departure Phase
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.a........  Normal and Crosswind         R    X    X
Takeoff
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.b........  Instrument Takeoff...   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.c........  Engine Failure During   A    X    X    X
Takeoff.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.d........  Rejected Takeoff.....   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.e........  Departure Procedure..   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Inflight Maneuvers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.a........  Steep Turns..........   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.b. High
Angle of
Attack
Maneuvers
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.b.1......  Approaches to Stall..   X    X    X    X
3.b.2......  Full Stall...........             X    X   Stall maneuvers
at angles of
attack above
the activation
of the stall
warning system.
Required only
for FSTDs
qualified to
conduct full
stall training
tasks as
indicated on
the Statement
of
Qualification.
3.c........  Engine Failure--        X    X    X    X
Multiengine Airplane.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.d........  Engine Failure--        X    X    X    X
Single-Engine
Airplane.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.e........  Specific Flight         A    A    A    A
Characteristics
incorporated into
the user's FAA
approved flight
training program.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.f........  Recovery From Unusual   X    X    X    X   Within the
Attitudes.                                 normal flight
envelope
supported by
applicable
simulation
validation
data.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.g........  Upset Prevention and              X    X   Upset recovery
Recovery Training                          or unusual
(UPRT).                                    attitude
training
maneuvers
within the
FSTD's
validation
envelope that
are intended to
exceed pitch
attitudes
greater than 25
degrees nose
up; pitch
attitudes
greater than 10
degrees nose
down, and bank
angles greater
than 45
degrees.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. Instrument Procedures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.a........  Standard Terminal       X    X    X    X
Arrival/Flight
Management System
Arrivals Procedures.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 48]]


4.b........  Holding..............   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.c........  Precision Instrument.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.c.1......  All Engines Operating   X    X    X    X   e.g., Autopilot,
Manual (Flt.
Dir. Assisted),
Manual (Raw
Data).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.c.2......  One Engine              X    X    X    X   e.g., Manual
Inoperative.                               (Flt. Dir.
Assisted),
Manual (Raw
Data).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.d........  Non-Precision           X    X    X    X   e.g., NDB, VOR,
Instrument Approach.                       VOR/DME, VOR/
TAC, RNAV, LOC,
LOC/BC, ADF,
and SDF.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.e........  Circling Approach....   X    X    X    X   Specific
authorization
required.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.f........  Missed Approach......
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.f.1......  Normal...............   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.f.2......  One Engine              X    X    X    X
Inoperative.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. Landings and Approaches to Landings
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.a........  Normal and Crosswind         R    X    X
Approaches and
Landings.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.b........  Landing From a               R    X    X
Precision/Non-
Precision Approach.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.c........  Approach and Landing   ...   R    X    X
with (Simulated)
Engine Failure--
Multiengine Airplane.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.d........  Landing From Circling        R    X    X
Approach.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.e........  Rejected Landing.....   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.f........  Landing From a No            R    X    X
Flap or a
Nonstandard Flap
Configuration
Approach.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6. Normal and Abnormal Procedures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.a........  Engine (including       X    X    X    X
shutdown and
restart).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.b........  Fuel System..........   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.c........  Electrical System....   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.d........  Hydraulic System.....   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.e........  Environmental and       X    X    X    X
Pressurization
Systems.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.f........  Fire Detection and      X    X    X    X
Extinguisher Systems.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.g........  Navigation and          X    X    X    X
Avionics Systems.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.h........  Automatic Flight        X    X    X    X
Control System,
Electronic Flight
Instrument System,
and Related
Subsystems.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.i........  Flight Control          X    X    X    X
Systems.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.j........  Anti-ice and Deice      X    X    X    X
Systems.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.k........  Aircraft and Personal   X    X    X    X
Emergency Equipment.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7. Emergency Procedures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.a........  Emergency Descent       X    X    X    X
(Max. Rate).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 49]]


7.b........  Inflight Fire and       X    X    X    X
Smoke Removal.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.c........  Rapid Decompression..   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.d........  Emergency Evacuation.   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8. Postflight Procedures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.a........  After-Landing           X    X    X    X
Procedures.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.b........  Parking and Securing.   X    X    X   X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
``A''--indicates that the system, task, or procedure may be examined if
the appropriate aircraft system or control is simulated in the FSTD
and is working properly.
``R''--indicates that the simulator may be qualified for this task for
continuing qualification training.
``X''--indicates that the simulator must be able to perform this task
for this level of qualification.


Table A1C--Table of Simulator System Tasks
------------------------------------------------------------------------
QPS requirements                        Information
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subjective        Simulator levels
requirements In order --------------------
to be qualified at
the simulator
qualification level
indicated, the
Entry No.     simulator must be                              Notes
able to perform at    A    B    C    D
least the tasks
associated with that
level of
qualification.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Instructor Operating Station (IOS), as appropriate
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.a........  Power switch(es).....   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.b........  Airplane conditions..   X    X    X    X   e.g., GW, CG,
Fuel loading
and Systems.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.c........  Airports/Runways.....   X    X    X    X   e.g., Selection,
Surface,
Presets,
Lighting
controls.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.d........  Environmental           X    X    X    X   e.g., Clouds,
controls.                                  Visibility,
RVR, Temp,
Wind, Ice,
Snow, Rain, and
Windshear.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.e........  Airplane system         X    X    X    X
malfunctions
(Insertion/deletion).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.f........  Locks, Freezes, and     X    X    X    X
Repositioning.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Sound Controls
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.a........  On/off/adjustment....   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Motion/Control Loading System
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.a........  On/off/emergency stop   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. Observer Seats/Stations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.a........  Position/Adjustment/    X    X    X    X
Positive restraint
system.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Attachment 2 to Appendix A to Part 60--FFS Objective Tests

Table of Contents
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Paragraph No.                            Title
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.................................  Introduction.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.................................  Test Requirements.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table A2A, Objective Tests.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.................................  General.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.................................  Control Dynamics.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 50]]


5.................................  Ground Effect.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.................................  Motion System.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.................................  Sound System.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8.................................  Additional Information About Flight
Simulator Qualification for New or
Derivative Airplanes.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
9.................................  Engineering Simulator--Validation
Data.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10................................  [Reserved]
------------------------------------------------------------------------
11................................  Validation Test Tolerances.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
12................................  Validation Data Roadmap.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
13................................  Acceptance Guidelines for
Alternative Engines Data.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
14................................  Acceptance Guidelines for
Alternative Avionics (Flight-
Related Computers and Controllers).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
15................................  Transport Delay Testing.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
16................................  Continuing Qualification
Evaluations--Validation Test Data
Presentation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
17................................  Alternative Data Sources,
Procedures, and Instrumentation:
Level A and Level B Simulators
Only.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

1. Introduction

a. For the purposes of this attachment, the flight conditions
specified in the Flight Conditions Column of Table A2A of this appendix,
are defined as follows:
(1) Ground--on ground, independent of airplane configuration;
(2) Take-off--gear down with flaps/slats in any certified takeoff
position;
(3) First segment climb--gear down with flaps/slats in any certified
takeoff position (normally not above 50 ft AGL);
(4) Second segment climb--gear up with flaps/slats in any certified
takeoff position (normally between 50 ft and 400 ft AGL);
(5) Clean--flaps/slats retracted and gear up;
(6) Cruise--clean configuration at cruise altitude and airspeed;
(7) Approach--gear up or down with flaps/slats at any normal
approach position as recommended by the airplane manufacturer; and
(8) Landing--gear down with flaps/slats in any certified landing
position.
b. The format for numbering the objective tests in Appendix A,
Attachment 2, Table A2A, and the objective tests in Appendix B,
Attachment 2, Table B2A, is identical. However, each test required for
FFSs is not necessarily required for FTDs. Also, each test required for
FTDs is not necessarily required for FFSs. Therefore, when a test number
(or series of numbers) is not required, the term ``Reserved'' is used in
the table at that location. Following this numbering format provides a
degree of commonality between the two tables and substantially reduces
the potential for confusion when referring to objective test numbers for
either FFSs or FTDs.
c. The reader is encouraged to review the Airplane Flight Simulator
Evaluation Handbook, Volumes I and II, published by the Royal
Aeronautical Society, London, UK, and AC 25-7, as amended, Flight Test
Guide for Certification of Transport Category Airplanes, and AC 23-8, as
amended, Flight Test Guide for Certification of Part 23 Airplanes, for
references and examples regarding flight testing requirements and
techniques.
d. If relevant winds are present in the objective data, the wind
vector should be clearly noted as part of the data presentation,
expressed in conventional terminology, and related to the runway being
used for the test.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

2. Test Requirements

a. The ground and flight tests required for qualification are listed
in Table A2A, FFS Objective Tests. Computer generated simulator test
results must be provided for each test except where an alternative test
is specifically authorized by the responsible Flight Standards office.
If a flight condition or operating condition is required for the test
but does not apply to the airplane being simulated or to the
qualification level sought, it may be disregarded (e.g., an engine out
missed approach for a single-engine airplane or a maneuver using reverse
thrust for an airplane without reverse thrust capability). Each test
result is compared against the validation data described in Sec.  60.13
and in this appendix. Although use of a driver program designed to
automatically accomplish the tests is encouraged for all simulators and
required for Level C and Level D simulators, it must be possible to
conduct each test manually while recording all appropriate parameters.
The results must be produced on an appropriate recording device
acceptable to the responsible Flight Standards office and must include
simulator number, date, time, conditions, tolerances, and appropriate
dependent variables portrayed in comparison to the validation data. Time
histories are required unless otherwise indicated in Table A2A. All
results must be labeled using the tolerances and units given.
b. Table A2A in this attachment sets out the test results required,
including the parameters, tolerances, and flight conditions

[[Page 51]]

for simulator validation. Tolerances are provided for the listed tests
because mathematical modeling and acquisition and development of
reference data are often inexact. All tolerances listed in the following
tables are applied to simulator performance. When two tolerance values
are given for a parameter, the less restrictive may be used unless
otherwise indicated. In those cases where a tolerance is expressed only
as a percentage, the tolerance percentage applies to the maximum value
of that parameter within its normal operating range as measured from the
neutral or zero position unless otherwise indicated.
c. Certain tests included in this attachment must be supported with
an SOC. In Table A2A, requirements for SOCs are indicated in the ``Test
Details'' column.
d. When operational or engineering judgment is used in making
assessments for flight test data applications for simulator validity,
such judgment must not be limited to a single parameter. For example,
data that exhibit rapid variations of the measured parameters may
require interpolations or a ``best fit'' data selection. All relevant
parameters related to a given maneuver or flight condition must be
provided to allow overall interpretation. When it is difficult or
impossible to match simulator to airplane data throughout a time
history, differences must be justified by providing a comparison of
other related variables for the condition being assessed.
e. It is not acceptable to program the FFS so that the mathematical
modeling is correct only at the validation test points. Unless otherwise
noted, simulator tests must represent airplane performance and handling
qualities at operating weights and centers of gravity (CG) typical of
normal operation. Simulator tests at extreme weight or CG conditions may
be acceptable where required for concurrent aircraft certification
testing. Tests of handling qualities must include validation of
augmentation devices.
f. When comparing the parameters listed to those of the airplane,
sufficient data must also be provided to verify the correct flight
condition and airplane configuration changes. For example, to show that
control force is within the parameters for a static stability test, data
to show the correct airspeed, power, thrust or torque, airplane
configuration, altitude, and other appropriate datum identification
parameters must also be given. If comparing short period dynamics,
normal acceleration may be used to establish a match to the airplane,
but airspeed, altitude, control input, airplane configuration, and other
appropriate data must also be given. If comparing landing gear change
dynamics, pitch, airspeed, and altitude may be used to establish a match
to the airplane, but landing gear position must also be provided. All
airspeed values must be properly annotated (e.g., indicated versus
calibrated). In addition, the same variables must be used for comparison
(e.g., compare inches to inches rather than inches to centimeters).
g. The QTG provided by the sponsor must clearly describe how the
simulator will be set up and operated for each test. Each simulator
subsystem may be tested independently, but overall integrated testing of
the simulator must be accomplished to assure that the total simulator
system meets the prescribed standards. A manual test procedure with
explicit and detailed steps for completing each test must also be
provided.
h. For previously qualified simulators, the tests and tolerances of
this attachment may be used in subsequent continuing qualification
evaluations for any given test if the sponsor has submitted a proposed
MQTG revision to the responsible Flight Standards office and has
received responsible Flight Standards office approval.
i. Simulators are evaluated and qualified with an engine model
simulating the airplane data supplier's flight test engine. For
qualification of alternative engine models (either variations of the
flight test engines or other manufacturer's engines) additional tests
with the alternative engine models may be required. This attachment
contains guidelines for alternative engines.
j. For testing Computer Controlled Aircraft (CCA) simulators, or
other highly augmented airplane simulators, flight test data is required
for the Normal (N) and/or Non-normal (NN) control states, as indicated
in this attachment. Where test results are independent of control state,
Normal or Non-normal control data may be used. All tests in Table A2A
require test results in the Normal control state unless specifically
noted otherwise in the Test Details section following the CCA
designation. The responsible Flight Standards office will determine what
tests are appropriate for airplane simulation data. When making this
determination, the responsible Flight Standards office may require other
levels of control state degradation for specific airplane tests. Where
Non-normal control states are required, test data must be provided for
one or more Non-normal control states, and must include the least
augmented state. Where applicable, flight test data must record Normal
and Non-normal states for:
(1) Pilot controller deflections or electronically generated inputs,
including location of input; and
(2) Flight control surface positions unless test results are not
affected by, or are independent of, surface positions.
k. Tests of handling qualities must include validation of
augmentation devices. FFSs for highly augmented airplanes will be
validated both in the unaugmented configuration (or failure state with
the maximum permitted degradation in handling qualities) and the

[[Page 52]]

augmented configuration. Where various levels of handling qualities
result from failure states, validation of the effect of the failure is
necessary. Requirements for testing will be mutually agreed to between
the sponsor and the responsible Flight Standards office on a case-by-
case basis.
l. Some tests will not be required for airplanes using airplane
hardware in the simulator flight deck (e.g., ``side stick controller'').
These exceptions are noted in Section 2 ``Handling Qualities'' in Table
A2A of this attachment. However, in these cases, the sponsor must
provide a statement that the airplane hardware meets the appropriate
manufacturer's specifications and the sponsor must have supporting
information to that fact available for responsible Flight Standards
office review.
m. For objective test purposes, see Appendix F of this part for the
definitions of ``Near maximum,'' ``Light,'' and ``Medium'' gross weight.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

n. In those cases where the objective test results authorize a
``snapshot test'' or a ``series of snapshot tests'' results in lieu of a
time-history result, the sponsor or other data provider must ensure that
a steady state condition exists at the instant of time captured by the
``snapshot.'' The steady state condition should exist from 4 seconds
prior to, through 1 second following, the instant of time captured by
the snap shot.
o. For references on basic operating weight, see AC 120-27,
``Aircraft Weight and Balance;'' and FAA-H-8083-1, ``Aircraft Weight and
Balance Handbook.''

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

[[Page 53]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.017


[[Page 54]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.018


[[Page 55]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.019


[[Page 56]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.020


[[Page 57]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.021


[[Page 58]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.022


[[Page 59]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.023


[[Page 60]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.024


[[Page 61]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.025


[[Page 62]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.026


[[Page 63]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.027


[[Page 64]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.028


[[Page 65]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.029


[[Page 66]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.030


[[Page 67]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.031


[[Page 68]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.032


[[Page 69]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.033


[[Page 70]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.034


[[Page 71]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.035


[[Page 72]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.036


[[Page 73]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.037


[[Page 74]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.038


[[Page 75]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.039


[[Page 76]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.040


[[Page 77]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.041


[[Page 78]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.042


[[Page 79]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.043


[[Page 80]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.044


[[Page 81]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.045


[[Page 82]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.046


[[Page 83]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.047


[[Page 84]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.048


[[Page 85]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.049


[[Page 86]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.050

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

3. General

a. If relevant winds are present in the objective data, the wind
vector should be clearly noted as part of the data presentation,
expressed in conventional terminology, and related to the runway being
used for test near the ground.
b. The reader is encouraged to review the Airplane Flight Simulator
Evaluation Handbook, Volumes I and II, published by the Royal
Aeronautical Society, London, UK, and AC 25-7, as amended, Flight Test
Guide for Certification of Transport Category Airplanes, and AC 23-8, as
amended, Flight Test

[[Page 87]]

Guide for Certification of Part 23 Airplanes, for references and
examples regarding flight testing requirements and techniques.

4. Control Dynamics

a. General. The characteristics of an airplane flight control system
have a major effect on handling qualities. A significant consideration
in pilot acceptability of an airplane is the ``feel'' provided through
the flight controls. Considerable effort is expended on airplane feel
system design so that pilots will be comfortable and will consider the
airplane desirable to fly. In order for an FFS to be representative, it
should ``feel'' like the airplane being simulated. Compliance with this
requirement is determined by comparing a recording of the control feel
dynamics of the FFS to actual airplane measurements in the takeoff,
cruise and landing configurations.
(1) Recordings such as free response to an impulse or step function
are classically used to estimate the dynamic properties of
electromechanical systems. In any case, it is only possible to estimate
the dynamic properties as a result of being able to estimate true inputs
and responses. Therefore, it is imperative that the best possible data
be collected since close matching of the FFS control loading system to
the airplane system is essential. The required dynamic control tests are
described in Table A2A of this attachment.
(2) For initial and upgrade evaluations, the QPS requires that
control dynamics characteristics be measured and recorded directly from
the flight controls (Handling Qualities--Table A2A). This procedure is
usually accomplished by measuring the free response of the controls
using a step or impulse input to excite the system. The procedure should
be accomplished in the takeoff, cruise and landing flight conditions and
configurations.
(3) For airplanes with irreversible control systems, measurements
may be obtained on the ground if proper pitot-static inputs are provided
to represent airspeeds typical of those encountered in flight. Likewise,
it may be shown that for some airplanes, takeoff, cruise, and landing
configurations have like effects. Thus, one may suffice for another. In
either case, engineering validation or airplane manufacturer rationale
should be submitted as justification for ground tests or for eliminating
a configuration. For FFSs requiring static and dynamic tests at the
controls, special test fixtures will not be required during initial and
upgrade evaluations if the QTG shows both test fixture results and the
results of an alternate approach (e.g., computer plots that were
produced concurrently and show satisfactory agreement). Repeat of the
alternate method during the initial evaluation satisfies this test
requirement.
b. Control Dynamics Evaluation. The dynamic properties of control
systems are often stated in terms of frequency, damping and a number of
other classical measurements. In order to establish a consistent means
of validating test results for FFS control loading, criteria are needed
that will clearly define the measurement interpretation and the applied
tolerances. Criteria are needed for underdamped, critically damped and
overdamped systems. In the case of an underdamped system with very light
damping, the system may be quantified in terms of frequency and damping.
In critically damped or overdamped systems, the frequency and damping
are not readily measured from a response time history. Therefore, the
following suggested measurements may be used:
(1) For Level C and D simulators. Tests to verify that control feel
dynamics represent the airplane should show that the dynamic damping
cycles (free response of the controls) match those of the airplane
within specified tolerances. The Flight Standards Service recognizes
that several different testing methods may be used to verify the control
feel dynamic response. The responsible Flight Standards office will
consider the merits of testing methods based on reliability and
consistency. One acceptable method of evaluating the response and the
tolerance to be applied is described below for the underdamped and
critically damped cases. A sponsor using this method to comply with the
QPS requirements should perform the tests as follows:
(a) Underdamped response. Two measurements are required for the
period, the time to first zero crossing (in case a rate limit is
present) and the subsequent frequency of oscillation. It is necessary to
measure cycles on an individual basis in case there are non-uniform
periods in the response. Each period will be independently compared to
the respective period of the airplane control system and, consequently,
will enjoy the full tolerance specified for that period. The damping
tolerance will be applied to overshoots on an individual basis. Care
should be taken when applying the tolerance to small overshoots since
the significance of such overshoots becomes questionable. Only those
overshoots larger than 5 per cent of the total initial displacement
should be considered. The residual band, labeled T(A<inf>d</inf>) on
Figure A2A is <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5 percent of the initial
displacement amplitude A<inf>d</inf> from the steady state value of the
oscillation. Only oscillations outside the residual band are considered
significant. When comparing FFS data to airplane data, the process
should begin by overlaying or aligning the FFS and airplane steady state
values and then comparing amplitudes of oscillation peaks, the time of
the first zero crossing and individual periods of oscillation. The FFS
should show the same number

[[Page 88]]

of significant overshoots to within one when compared against the
airplane data. The procedure for evaluating the response is illustrated
in Figure A2A.
(b) Critically damped and overdamped response. Due to the nature of
critically damped and overdamped responses (no overshoots), the time to
reach 90 percent of the steady state (neutral point) value should be the
same as the airplane within <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10 percent. Figure A2B
illustrates the procedure.
(c) Special considerations. Control systems that exhibit
characteristics other than classical overdamped or underdamped responses
should meet specified tolerances. In addition, special consideration
should be given to ensure that significant trends are maintained.
(2) Tolerances.
(a) The following table summarizes the tolerances, T, for
underdamped systems, and ``n'' is the sequential period of a full cycle
of oscillation. See Figure A2A of this attachment for an illustration of
the referenced measurements.

T(P0).....................................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10% of
P0.
T(P1).....................................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>20% of
P1.
T(P2).....................................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>30% of
P2.
T(Pn).....................................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10(n +
1)% of Pn.
T(An).....................................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10% of
A1.
T(Ad).....................................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5% of
Ad = residual band.


Significant overshoots, First overshoot and <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>1
subsequent overshoots.
(b) The following tolerance applies to critically damped and
overdamped systems only. See Figure A2B for an illustration of the
reference measurements:

T(P0).....................................  <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>10% of
P0


End Information

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirement

c. Alternative method for control dynamics evaluation.
(1) An alternative means for validating control dynamics for
aircraft with hydraulically powered flight controls and artificial feel
systems is by the measurement of control force and rate of movement. For
each axis of pitch, roll, and yaw, the control must be forced to its
maximum extreme position for the following distinct rates. These tests
are conducted under normal flight and ground conditions.
(a) Static test--Slowly move the control so that a full sweep is
achieved within 95 to 105 seconds. A full sweep is defined as movement
of the controller from neutral to the stop, usually aft or right stop,
then to the opposite stop, then to the neutral position.
(b) Slow dynamic test--Achieve a full sweep within 8-12 seconds.
(c) Fast dynamic test--Achieve a full sweep within 3-5 seconds.

Note: Dynamic sweeps may be limited to forces not exceeding 100 lbs.
(44.5 daN).

(d) Tolerances
(i) Static test; see Table A2A, FFS Objective Tests, Entries 2.a.1.,
2.a.2., and 2.a.3.
(ii) Dynamic test--<plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>2 lbs (0.9 daN) or <plus- minus<ls-thn-eq="">10% on dynamic increment above static test.

End QPS Requirement

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

d. The FAA is open to alternative means such as the one described
above. The alternatives should be justified and appropriate to the
application. For example, the method described here may not apply to all
manufacturers' systems and certainly not to aircraft with reversible
control systems. Each case is considered on its own merit on an ad hoc
basis. If the FAA finds that alternative methods do not result in
satisfactory performance, more conventionally accepted methods will have
to be used.

[[Page 89]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.000


[[Page 90]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.001

5. Ground Effect

a. For an FFS to be used for take-off and landing (not applicable to
Level A simulators in that the landing maneuver may not be credited in a
Level A simulator) it should reproduce the aerodynamic changes that
occur in ground effect. The parameters chosen for FFS validation should
indicate these changes.
(1) A dedicated test should be provided that will validate the
aerodynamic ground effect characteristics.
(2) The organization performing the flight tests may select
appropriate test methods and procedures to validate ground effect.
However, the flight tests should be performed with enough duration near
the ground to sufficiently validate the ground-effect model.
b. The responsible Flight Standards office will consider the merits
of testing methods based on reliability and consistency. Acceptable
methods of validating ground effect are described below. If other
methods are proposed, rationale should be provided to conclude that the
tests performed validate the ground-effect model. A sponsor using the
methods described below to comply with the QPS requirements should
perform the tests as follows:
(1) Level fly-bys. The level fly-bys should be conducted at a
minimum of three altitudes within the ground effect, including one at no
more than 10% of the wingspan above the ground, one each at
approximately 30% and 50% of the wingspan where height refers to main
gear tire above the ground. In addition, one level-flight trim condition
should be conducted out of ground effect (e.g., at 150% of wingspan).
(2) Shallow approach landing. The shallow approach landing should be
performed at a glide slope of approximately one degree with negligible
pilot activity until flare.
c. The lateral-directional characteristics are also altered by
ground effect. For example, because of changes in lift, roll damping is
affected. The change in roll damping will affect other dynamic modes
usually evaluated for FFS validation. In fact, Dutch roll dynamics,
spiral stability, and roll-rate for a given lateral control input are
altered by ground effect. Steady heading sideslips will also be
affected. These effects should be accounted for in the FFS modeling.
Several

[[Page 91]]

tests such as crosswind landing, one engine inoperative landing, and
engine failure on take-off serve to validate lateral-directional ground
effect since portions of these tests are accomplished as the aircraft is
descending through heights above the runway at which ground effect is an
important factor.

6. Motion System

a. General.
(1) Pilots use continuous information signals to regulate the state
of the airplane. In concert with the instruments and outside-world
visual information, whole-body motion feedback is essential in assisting
the pilot to control the airplane dynamics, particularly in the presence
of external disturbances. The motion system should meet basic objective
performance criteria, and should be subjectively tuned at the pilot's
seat position to represent the linear and angular accelerations of the
airplane during a prescribed minimum set of maneuvers and conditions.
The response of the motion cueing system should also be repeatable.
(2) The Motion System tests in Section 3 of Table A2A are intended
to qualify the FFS motion cueing system from a mechanical performance
standpoint. Additionally, the list of motion effects provides a
representative sample of dynamic conditions that should be present in
the flight simulator. An additional list of representative, training-
critical maneuvers, selected from Section 1 (Performance tests), and
Section 2 (Handling Qualities tests), in Table A2A, that should be
recorded during initial qualification (but without tolerance) to
indicate the flight simulator motion cueing performance signature have
been identified (reference Section 3.e). These tests are intended to
help improve the overall standard of FFS motion cueing.
b. Motion System Checks. The intent of test 3a, Frequency Response,
and test 3b, Turn-Around Check, as described in the Table of Objective
Tests, are to demonstrate the performance of the motion system hardware,
and to check the integrity of the motion set-up with regard to
calibration and wear. These tests are independent of the motion cueing
software and should be considered robotic tests.
c. Motion System Repeatability. The intent of this test is to ensure
that the motion system software and motion system hardware have not
degraded or changed over time. This diagnostic test should be completed
during continuing qualification checks in lieu of the robotic tests.
This will allow an improved ability to determine changes in the software
or determine degradation in the hardware. The following information
delineates the methodology that should be used for this test.
(1) Input: The inputs should be such that rotational accelerations,
rotational rates, and linear accelerations are inserted before the
transfer from airplane center of gravity to pilot reference point with a
minimum amplitude of 5 deg/sec/sec, 10 deg/sec and 0.3 g, respectively,
to provide adequate analysis of the output.
(2) Recommended output:
(a) Actual platform linear accelerations; the output will comprise
accelerations due to both the linear and rotational motion acceleration;
(b) Motion actuators position.
d. Objective Motion Cueing Test--Frequency Domain
(1) Background. This test quantifies the response of the motion
cueing system from the output of the flight model to the motion platform
response. Other motion tests, such as the motion system frequency
response, concentrate on the mechanical performance of the motion system
hardware alone. The intent of this test is to provide quantitative
frequency response records of the entire motion system for specified
degree-of-freedom transfer relationships over a range of frequencies.
This range should be representative of the manual control range for that
particular aircraft type and the simulator as set up during
qualification. The measurements of this test should include the combined
influence of the motion cueing algorithm, the motion platform dynamics,
and the transport delay associated with the motion cueing and control
system implementation. Specified frequency responses describing the
ability of the FSTD to reproduce aircraft translations and rotations, as
well as the cross-coupling relations, are required as part of these
measurements. When simulating forward aircraft acceleration, the
simulator is accelerated momentarily in the forward direction to provide
the onset cueing. This is considered the direct transfer relation. The
simulator is simultaneously tilted nose-up due to the low-pass filter in
order to generate a sustained specific force. The tilt associated with
the generation of the sustained specific force, and the angular rates
and angular accelerations associated with the initiation of the
sustained specific force, are considered cross-coupling relations. The
specific force is required for the perception of the aircraft sustained
specific force, while the angular rates and accelerations do not occur
in the aircraft and should be minimized.
(2) Frequency response test. This test requires the frequency
response to be measured for the motion cueing system. Reference
sinusoidal signals are inserted at the pilot reference position prior to
the motion cueing computations. The response of the motion platform in
the corresponding degree-of-freedom (the direct transfer relations), as
well as the motions resulting from cross-coupling (the cross-coupling
relations), are recorded. These are the tests that are important to

[[Page 92]]

pilot motion cueing and are general tests applicable to all types of
airplanes.
(3) This test is only required to be run once for the initial
qualification of the FSTD and will not be required for continuing
qualification purposes. The FAA will accept test results provided by the
FSTD manufacturer as part of a Statement of Compliance confirming that
the objective motion cueing tests were used to assist in the tuning of
the FSTD's motion cueing algorithms.
e. Motion Vibrations.
(1) Presentation of results. The characteristic motion vibrations
may be used to verify that the flight simulator can reproduce the
frequency content of the airplane when flown in specific conditions. The
test results should be presented as a Power Spectral Density (PSD) plot
with frequencies on the horizontal axis and amplitude on the vertical
axis. The airplane data and flight simulator data should be presented in
the same format with the same scaling. The algorithms used for
generating the flight simulator data should be the same as those used
for the airplane data. If they are not the same then the algorithms used
for the flight simulator data should be proven to be sufficiently
comparable. As a minimum, the results along the dominant axes should be
presented and a rationale for not presenting the other axes should be
provided.
(2) Interpretation of results. The overall trend of the PSD plot
should be considered while focusing on the dominant frequencies. Less
emphasis should be placed on the differences at the high frequency and
low amplitude portions of the PSD plot. During the analysis, certain
structural components of the flight simulator have resonant frequencies
that are filtered and may not appear in the PSD plot. If filtering is
required, the notch filter bandwidth should be limited to 1 Hz to ensure
that the buffet feel is not adversely affected. In addition, a rationale
should be provided to explain that the characteristic motion vibration
is not being adversely affected by the filtering. The amplitude should
match airplane data as described below. However, if the PSD plot was
altered for subjective reasons, a rationale should be provided to
justify the change. If the plot is on a logarithmic scale, it may be
difficult to interpret the amplitude of the buffet in terms of
acceleration. For example, a 1 x 10<sup>-3</sup> g-rms\2\/Hz would
describe a heavy buffet and may be seen in the deep stall regime.
Alternatively, a 1 x 10<sup>-6</sup> g-rms\2\/Hz buffet is almost not
perceivable; but may represent a flap buffet at low speed. The previous
two examples differ in magnitude by 1000. On a PSD plot this represents
three decades (one decade is a change in order of magnitude of 10; and
two decades is a change in order of magnitude of 100).

Note: In the example, ``g-rms\2\ is the mathematical expression for
``g's root mean squared.''

7. Sound System

a. General. The total sound environment in the airplane is very
complex, and changes with atmospheric conditions, airplane
configuration, airspeed, altitude, and power settings. Flight deck
sounds are an important component of the flight deck operational
environment and provide valuable information to the flight crew. These
aural cues can either assist the crew (as an indication of an abnormal
situation), or hinder the crew (as a distraction or nuisance). For
effective training, the flight simulator should provide flight deck
sounds that are perceptible to the pilot during normal and abnormal
operations, and comparable to those of the airplane. The flight
simulator operator should carefully evaluate background noises in the
location where the device will be installed. To demonstrate compliance
with the sound requirements, the objective or validation tests in this
attachment were selected to provide a representative sample of normal
static conditions typically experienced by a pilot.
b. Alternate propulsion. For FFS with multiple propulsion
configurations, any condition listed in Table A2A of this attachment
should be presented for evaluation as part of the QTG if identified by
the airplane manufacturer or other data supplier as significantly
different due to a change in propulsion system (engine or propeller).
c. Data and Data Collection System.
(1) Information provided to the flight simulator manufacturer should
be presented in the format suggested by the International Air Transport
Association (IATA) ``Flight Simulator Design and Performance Data
Requirements,'' as amended. This information should contain calibration
and frequency response data.
(2) The system used to perform the tests listed in Table A2A should
comply with the following standards:
(a) The specifications for octave, half octave, and third octave
band filter sets may be found in American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) S1.11-1986;
(b) Measurement microphones should be type WS2 or better, as
described in International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 1094-4-
1995.
(3) Headsets. If headsets are used during normal operation of the
airplane they should also be used during the flight simulator
evaluation.
(4) Playback equipment. Playback equipment and recordings of the QTG
conditions should be provided during initial evaluations.
(5) Background noise.

[[Page 93]]

(a) Background noise is the noise in the flight simulator that is
not associated with the airplane, but is caused by the flight
simulator's cooling and hydraulic systems and extraneous noise from
other locations in the building. Background noise can seriously impact
the correct simulation of airplane sounds and should be kept below the
airplane sounds. In some cases, the sound level of the simulation can be
increased to compensate for the background noise. However, this approach
is limited by the specified tolerances and by the subjective
acceptability of the sound environment to the evaluation pilot.
(b) The acceptability of the background noise levels is dependent
upon the normal sound levels in the airplane being represented.
Background noise levels that fall below the lines defined by the
following points, may be acceptable:
(i) 70 dB @ 50 Hz;
(ii) 55 dB @ 1000 Hz;
(iii) 30 dB @ 16 kHz
(Note: These limits are for unweighted \1/3\ octave band sound
levels. Meeting these limits for background noise does not ensure an
acceptable flight simulator. Airplane sounds that fall below this limit
require careful review and may require lower limits on background
noise.)
(6) Validation testing. Deficiencies in airplane recordings should
be considered when applying the specified tolerances to ensure that the
simulation is representative of the airplane. Examples of typical
deficiencies are:
(a) Variation of data between tail numbers;
(b) Frequency response of microphones;
(c) Repeatability of the measurements.

Table A2B--Example of Continuing Qualification Frequency Response Test
Tolerance
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Continuing
Initial    qualification    Absolute
Band center  frequency        results       results      difference
(dBSPL)       (dBSPL)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
50.............................         75.0           73.8          1.2
63.............................         75.9           75.6          0.3
80.............................         77.1           76.5          0.6
100............................         78.0           78.3          0.3
125............................         81.9           81.3          0.6
160............................         79.8           80.1          0.3
200............................         83.1           84.9          1.8
250............................         78.6           78.9          0.3
315............................         79.5           78.3          1.2
400............................         80.1           79.5          0.6
500............................         80.7           79.8          0.9
630............................         81.9           80.4          1.5
800............................         73.2           74.1          0.9
1000...........................         79.2           80.1          0.9
1250...........................         80.7           82.8          2.1
1600...........................         81.6           78.6          3.0
2000...........................         76.2           74.4          1.8
2500...........................         79.5           80.7          1.2
3150...........................         80.1           77.1          3.0
4000...........................         78.9           78.6          0.3
5000...........................         80.1           77.1          3.0
6300...........................         80.7           80.4          0.3
8000...........................         84.3           85.5          1.2
10000..........................         81.3           79.8          1.5
12500..........................         80.7           80.1          0.6
16000..........................         71.1           71.1          0.0
----------------------------------------
Average....................  ...........  .............          1.1
------------------------------------------------------------------------

8. Additional Information About Flight Simulator Qualification for New
or Derivative Airplanes

a. Typically, an airplane manufacturer's approved final data for
performance, handling qualities, systems or avionics is not available
until well after a new or derivative airplane has entered service.
However, flight crew training and certification often begins several
months prior to the entry of the first airplane into service.
Consequently, it may be necessary to use preliminary data provided by
the airplane manufacturer for interim qualification of flight
simulators.
b. In these cases, the responsible Flight Standards office may
accept certain partially validated preliminary airplane and systems
data, and early release (``red label'') avionics data in order to permit
the necessary program schedule for training, certification, and service
introduction.
c. Simulator sponsors seeking qualification based on preliminary
data should consult the responsible Flight Standards office to make
special arrangements for using preliminary data for flight simulator
qualification. The sponsor should also consult the airplane and flight
simulator manufacturers to develop a data plan and flight simulator
qualification plan.
d. The procedure to be followed to gain the responsible Flight
Standards office acceptance of preliminary data will vary from case to
case and between airplane manufacturers. Each airplane manufacturer's
new airplane development and test program is designed to suit the needs
of the particular project and may not contain the same events or
sequence of events as another manufacturer's program, or even the same
manufacturer's program for a different airplane. Therefore, there cannot
be a prescribed invariable procedure for acceptance of preliminary data,
but instead there should be a statement describing the final sequence of
events, data sources, and validation procedures agreed by the simulator
sponsor, the airplane manufacturer, the flight simulator manufacturer,
and the responsible Flight Standards office.


[[Page 94]]


Note: A description of airplane manufacturer-provided data needed
for flight simulator modeling and validation is to be found in the IATA
Document ``Flight Simulator Design and Performance Data Requirements,''
as amended.

e. The preliminary data should be the manufacturer's best
representation of the airplane, with assurance that the final data will
not significantly deviate from the preliminary estimates. Data derived
from these predictive or preliminary techniques should be validated
against available sources including, at least, the following:
(1) Manufacturer's engineering report. The report should explain the
predictive method used and illustrate past success of the method on
similar projects. For example, the manufacturer could show the
application of the method to an earlier airplane model or predict the
characteristics of an earlier model and compare the results to final
data for that model.
(2) Early flight test results. This data is often derived from
airplane certification tests, and should be used to maximum advantage
for early flight simulator validation. Certain critical tests that would
normally be done early in the airplane certification program should be
included to validate essential pilot training and certification
maneuvers. These include cases where a pilot is expected to cope with an
airplane failure mode or an engine failure. Flight test data that will
be available early in the flight test program will depend on the
airplane manufacturer's flight test program design and may not be the
same in each case. The flight test program of the airplane manufacturer
should include provisions for generation of very early flight test
results for flight simulator validation.
f. The use of preliminary data is not indefinite. The airplane
manufacturer's final data should be available within 12 months after the
airplane's first entry into service or as agreed by the responsible
Flight Standards office, the simulator sponsor, and the airplane
manufacturer. When applying for interim qualification using preliminary
data, the simulator sponsor and the responsible Flight Standards office
should agree on the update program. This includes specifying that the
final data update will be installed in the flight simulator within a
period of 12 months following the final data release, unless special
conditions exist and a different schedule is acceptable. The flight
simulator performance and handling validation would then be based on
data derived from flight tests or from other approved sources. Initial
airplane systems data should be updated after engineering tests. Final
airplane systems data should also be used for flight simulator
programming and validation.
g. Flight simulator avionics should stay essentially in step with
airplane avionics (hardware and software) updates. The permitted time
lapse between airplane and flight simulator updates should be minimal.
It may depend on the magnitude of the update and whether the QTG and
pilot training and certification are affected. Differences in airplane
and flight simulator avionics versions and the resulting effects on
flight simulator qualification should be agreed between the simulator
sponsor and the responsible Flight Standards office. Consultation with
the flight simulator manufacturer is desirable throughout the
qualification process.
h. The following describes an example of the design data and sources
that might be used in the development of an interim qualification plan.
(1) The plan should consist of the development of a QTG based upon a
mix of flight test and engineering simulation data. For data collected
from specific airplane flight tests or other flights, the required
design model or data changes necessary to support an acceptable Proof of
Match (POM) should be generated by the airplane manufacturer.
(2) For proper validation of the two sets of data, the airplane
manufacturer should compare their simulation model responses against the
flight test data, when driven by the same control inputs and subjected
to the same atmospheric conditions as recorded in the flight test. The
model responses should result from a simulation where the following
systems are run in an integrated fashion and are consistent with the
design data released to the flight simulator manufacturer:
(a) Propulsion;
(b) Aerodynamics;
(c) Mass properties;
(d) Flight controls;
(e) Stability augmentation; and
(f) Brakes/landing gear.
i. A qualified test pilot should be used to assess handling
qualities and performance evaluations for the qualification of flight
simulators of new airplane types.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirement

9. Engineering Simulator--Validation Data

a. When a fully validated simulation (i.e., validated with flight
test results) is modified due to changes to the simulated airplane
configuration, the airplane manufacturer or other acceptable data
supplier must coordinate with the responsible Flight Standards office if
they propose to supply validation data from an ``audited'' engineering
simulator/simulation to selectively supplement flight test data. The
responsible Flight Standards office must be provided an opportunity to
audit the engineering simulation

[[Page 95]]

or the engineering simulator used to generate the validation data.
Validation data from an audited engineering simulation may be used for
changes that are incremental in nature. Manufacturers or other data
suppliers must be able to demonstrate that the predicted changes in
aircraft performance are based on acceptable aeronautical principles
with proven success history and valid outcomes. This must include
comparisons of predicted and flight test validated data.
b. Airplane manufacturers or other acceptable data suppliers seeking
to use an engineering simulator for simulation validation data as an
alternative to flight-test derived validation data, must contact the
responsible Flight Standards office and provide the following:
(1) A description of the proposed aircraft changes, a description of
the proposed simulation model changes, and the use of an integral
configuration management process, including a description of the actual
simulation model modifications that includes a step-by-step description
leading from the original model(s) to the current model(s).
(2) A schedule for review by the responsible Flight Standards office
of the proposed plan and the subsequent validation data to establish
acceptability of the proposal.
(3) Validation data from an audited engineering simulator/simulation
to supplement specific segments of the flight test data.
c. To be qualified to supply engineering simulator validation data,
for aerodynamic, engine, flight control, or ground handling models, an
airplane manufacturer or other acceptable data supplier must:
(1) Be able to verify their ability able to:
(a) Develop and implement high fidelity simulation models; and
(b) Predict the handling and performance characteristics of an
airplane with sufficient accuracy to avoid additional flight test
activities for those handling and performance characteristics.
(2) Have an engineering simulator that:
(a) Is a physical entity, complete with a flight deck representative
of the simulated class of airplane;
(b) Has controls sufficient for manual flight;
(c) Has models that run in an integrated manner;
(d) Has fully flight-test validated simulation models as the
original or baseline simulation models;
(e) Has an out-of-the-flight deck visual system;
(f) Has actual avionics boxes interchangeable with the equivalent
software simulations to support validation of released software;
(g) Uses the same models as released to the training community
(which are also used to produce stand-alone proof-of-match and checkout
documents);
(h) Is used to support airplane development and certification; and
(i) Has been found to be a high fidelity representation of the
airplane by the manufacturer's pilots (or other acceptable data
supplier), certificate holders, and the responsible Flight Standards
office.
(3) Use the engineering simulator/simulation to produce a
representative set of integrated proof-of-match cases.
(4) Use a configuration control system covering hardware and
software for the operating components of the engineering simulator/
simulation.
(5) Demonstrate that the predicted effects of the change(s) are
within the provisions of sub-paragraph ``a'' of this section, and
confirm that additional flight test data are not required.
d. Additional Requirements for Validation Data
(1) When used to provide validation data, an engineering simulator
must meet the simulator standards currently applicable to training
simulators except for the data package.
(2) The data package used must be:
(a) Comprised of the engineering predictions derived from the
airplane design, development, or certification process;
(b) Based on acceptable aeronautical principles with proven success
history and valid outcomes for aerodynamics, engine operations, avionics
operations, flight control applications, or ground handling;
(c) Verified with existing flight-test data; and
(d) Applicable to the configuration of a production airplane, as
opposed to a flight-test airplane.
(3) Where engineering simulator data are used as part of a QTG, an
essential match must exist between the training simulator and the
validation data.
(4) Training flight simulator(s) using these baseline and modified
simulation models must be qualified to at least internationally
recognized standards, such as contained in the ICAO Document 9625, the
``Manual of Criteria for the Qualification of Flight Simulators.''

End QPS Requirement

________________________________________________________________________

10. [Reserved]

11. Validation Test Tolerances

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

a. Non-Flight-Test Tolerances
(1) If engineering simulator data or other non-flight-test data are
used as an allowable

[[Page 96]]

form of reference validation data for the objective tests listed in
Table A2A of this attachment, the data provider must supply a well-
documented mathematical model and testing procedure that enables a
replication of the engineering simulation results within 40% of the
corresponding flight test tolerances.
b. Background
(1) The tolerances listed in Table A2A of this attachment are
designed to measure the quality of the match using flight-test data as a
reference.
(2) Good engineering judgment should be applied to all tolerances in
any test. A test is failed when the results clearly fall outside of the
prescribed tolerance(s).
(3) Engineering simulator data are acceptable because the same
simulation models used to produce the reference data are also used to
test the flight training simulator (i.e., the two sets of results should
be ``essentially'' similar).
(4) The results from the two sources may differ for the following
reasons:
(a) Hardware (avionics units and flight controls);
(b) Iteration rates;
(c) Execution order;
(d) Integration methods;
(e) Processor architecture;
(f) Digital drift, including:
(i) Interpolation methods;
(ii) Data handling differences; and
(iii) Auto-test trim tolerances.
(5) The tolerance limit between the reference data and the flight
simulator results is generally 40 percent of the corresponding `flight-
test' tolerances. However, there may be cases where the simulator models
used are of higher fidelity, or the manner in which they are cascaded in
the integrated testing loop have the effect of a higher fidelity, than
those supplied by the data provider. Under these circumstances, it is
possible that an error greater than 40 percent may be generated. An
error greater than 40 percent may be acceptable if simulator sponsor can
provide an adequate explanation.
(6) Guidelines are needed for the application of tolerances to
engineering-simulator-generated validation data because:
(a) Flight-test data are often not available due to technical
reasons;
(b) Alternative technical solutions are being advanced; and
(c) High costs.

12. Validation Data Roadmap

a. Airplane manufacturers or other data suppliers should supply a
validation data roadmap (VDR) document as part of the data package. A
VDR document contains guidance material from the airplane validation
data supplier recommending the best possible sources of data to be used
as validation data in the QTG. A VDR is of special value when requesting
interim qualification, qualification of simulators for airplanes
certificated prior to 1992, and qualification of alternate engine or
avionics fits. A sponsor seeking to have a device qualified in
accordance with the standards contained in this QPS appendix should
submit a VDR to the responsible Flight Standards office as early as
possible in the planning stages. The responsible Flight Standards office
is the final authority to approve the data to be used as validation
material for the QTG.
b. The VDR should identify (in matrix format) sources of data for
all required tests. It should also provide guidance regarding the
validity of these data for a specific engine type, thrust rating
configuration, and the revision levels of all avionics affecting
airplane handling qualities and performance. The VDR should include
rationale or explanation in cases where data or parameters are missing,
engineering simulation data are to be used, flight test methods require
explanation, or there is any deviation from data requirements.
Additionally, the document should refer to other appropriate sources of
validation data (e.g., sound and vibration data documents).
c. The Sample Validation Data Roadmap (VDR) for airplanes, shown in
Table A2C, depicts a generic roadmap matrix identifying sources of
validation data for an abbreviated list of tests. This document is
merely a sample and does not provide actual data. A complete matrix
should address all test conditions and provide actual data and data
sources.
d. Two examples of rationale pages are presented in Appendix F of
the IATA ``Flight Simulator Design and Performance Data Requirements.''
These illustrate the type of airplane and avionics configuration
information and descriptive engineering rationale used to describe data
anomalies or provide an acceptable basis for using alternative data for
QTG validation requirements.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

[[Page 97]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.002


[[Page 98]]



Begin Information

________________________________________________________________________

13. Acceptance Guidelines for Alternative Engines Data.

a. Background

(1) For a new airplane type, the majority of flight validation data
are collected on the first airplane configuration with a ``baseline''
engine type. These data are then used to validate all flight simulators
representing that airplane type.
(2) Additional flight test validation data may be needed for flight
simulators representing an airplane with engines of a different type
than the baseline, or for engines with thrust rating that is different
from previously validated configurations.
(3) When a flight simulator with alternate engines is to be
qualified, the QTG should contain tests against flight test validation
data for selected cases where engine differences are expected to be
significant.

b. Approval Guidelines For Validating Alternate Engine Applications

(1) The following guidelines apply to flight simulators representing
airplanes with alternate engine applications or with more than one
engine type or thrust rating.
(2) Validation tests can be segmented into two groups, those that
are dependent on engine type or thrust rating and those that are not.
(3) For tests that are independent of engine type or thrust rating,
the QTG can be based on validation data from any engine application.
Tests in this category should be designated as independent of engine
type or thrust rating.
(4) For tests that are affected by engine type, the QTG should
contain selected engine-specific flight test data sufficient to validate
that particular airplane-engine configuration. These effects may be due
to engine dynamic characteristics, thrust levels or engine-related
airplane configuration changes. This category is primarily characterized
by variations between different engine manufacturers' products, but also
includes differences due to significant engine design changes from a
previously flight-validated configuration within a single engine type.
See Table A2D, Alternate Engine Validation Flight Tests in this section
for a list of acceptable tests.
(5) Alternate engine validation data should be based on flight test
data, except as noted in sub-paragraphs 13.c.(1) and (2), or where other
data are specifically allowed (e.g., engineering simulator/simulation
data). If certification of the flight characteristics of the airplane
with a new thrust rating (regardless of percentage change) does require
certification flight testing with a comprehensive stability and control
flight instrumentation package, then the conditions described in Table
A2D in this section should be obtained from flight testing and presented
in the QTG. Flight test data, other than throttle calibration data, are
not required if the new thrust rating is certified on the airplane
without need for a comprehensive stability and control flight
instrumentation package.
(6) As a supplement to the engine-specific flight tests listed in
Table A2D and baseline engine-independent tests, additional engine-
specific engineering validation data should be provided in the QTG, as
appropriate, to facilitate running the entire QTG with the alternate
engine configuration. The sponsor and the responsible Flight Standards
office should agree in advance on the specific validation tests to be
supported by engineering simulation data.
(7) A matrix or VDR should be provided with the QTG indicating the
appropriate validation data source for each test.
(8) The flight test conditions in Table A2D are appropriate and
should be sufficient to validate implementation of alternate engines in
a flight simulator.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirement

c. Test Requirements

(1) The QTG must contain selected engine-specific flight test data
sufficient to validate the alternative thrust level when:
(a) the engine type is the same, but the thrust rating exceeds that
of a previously flight-test validated configuration by five percent (5%)
or more; or
(b) the engine type is the same, but the thrust rating is less than
the lowest previously flight-test validated rating by fifteen percent
(15%) or more. See Table A2D for a list of acceptable tests.
(2) Flight test data is not required if the thrust increase is
greater than 5%, but flight tests have confirmed that the thrust
increase does not change the airplane's flight characteristics.
(3) Throttle calibration data (i.e., commanded power setting
parameter versus throttle position) must be provided to validate all
alternate engine types and engine thrust ratings that are higher or
lower than a previously validated engine. Data from a test airplane or
engineering test bench with the correct engine controller (both hardware
and software) are required.

End QPS Requirement

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirement

[[Page 99]]



Table A2D--Alternative Engine Validation Flight Tests

Alternative
Entry No.                 Test description                             Alternative     thrust rating
engine type          \2\


1.b.1., 1.b.4..................--Normal take-off/ground acceleration time and----------------X----------------X-
distance
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.b.2..........................  Vmcg, if performed for airplane certification               X                X
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.b.5..........................  Engine-out take-off     Either test may be
1.b.8.                           Dynamic engine failure   performed                          X
after take-off.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.b.7..........................  Rejected take-off if performed for airplane                 X
certification
1.d.1..........................  Cruise performance                                          X
1.f.1., 1.f.2..................  Engine acceleration and deceleration                        X                X
2.a.7..........................  Throttle calibration \1\                                    X                X
2.c.1..........................  Power change dynamics (acceleration)                        X                X
2.d.1..........................  Vmca if performed for airplane certification                X                X
2.d.5..........................  Engine inoperative trim                                     X                X
2.e.1..........................  Normal landing                                              X   ...............

\1\ Must be provided for all changes in engine type or thrust rating; see paragraph 13.c.(3).
\2\ See paragraphs 13.c.(1) through 13.c.(3), for a definition of applicable thrust ratings.

End QPS Requirement

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

14. Acceptance Guidelines for Alternative Avionics (Flight-Related
Computers and Controllers)

a. Background

(1) For a new airplane type, the majority of flight validation data
are collected on the first airplane configuration with a ``baseline''
flight-related avionics ship-set; (see subparagraph b.(2) of this
section). These data are then used to validate all flight simulators
representing that airplane type.
(2) Additional validation data may be required for flight simulators
representing an airplane with avionics of a different hardware design
than the baseline, or a different software revision than previously
validated configurations.
(3) When a flight simulator with additional or alternate avionics
configurations is to be qualified, the QTG should contain tests against
validation data for selected cases where avionics differences are
expected to be significant.

b. Approval Guidelines for Validating Alternate Avionics

(1) The following guidelines apply to flight simulators representing
airplanes with a revised avionics configuration, or more than one
avionics configuration.
(2) The baseline validation data should be based on flight test
data, except where other data are specifically allowed (e.g.,
engineering flight simulator data).
(3) The airplane avionics can be segmented into two groups, systems
or components whose functional behavior contributes to the aircraft
response presented in the QTG results, and systems that do not. The
following avionics are examples of contributory systems for which
hardware design changes or software revisions may lead to significant
differences in the aircraft response relative to the baseline avionics
configuration: Flight control computers and controllers for engines,
autopilot, braking system, nosewheel steering system, and high lift
system. Related avionics such as stall warning and augmentation systems
should also be considered.
(4) The acceptability of validation data used in the QTG for an
alternative avionics fit should be determined as follows:
(a) For changes to an avionics system or component that do not
affect QTG validation test response, the QTG test can be based on
validation data from the previously validated avionics configuration.
(b) For an avionics change to a contributory system, where a
specific test is not affected by the change (e.g., the avionics change
is a Built In Test Equipment (BITE) update or a modification in a
different flight phase), the QTG test can be based on validation data
from the previously-validated avionics configuration. The QTG should
include authoritative justification (e.g., from the airplane
manufacturer or system supplier) that this avionics change does not
affect the test.
(c) For an avionics change to a contributory system, the QTG may be
based on validation data from the previously-validated avionics
configuration if no new functionality is added and the impact of the
avionics change on the airplane response is small and based on
acceptable aeronautical principles with proven success history and valid
outcomes. This should be supplemented with avionics-specific validation
data from the airplane manufacturer's engineering

[[Page 100]]

simulation, generated with the revised avionics configuration. The QTG
should also include an explanation of the nature of the change and its
effect on the airplane response.
(d) For an avionics change to a contributory system that
significantly affects some tests in the QTG or where new functionality
is added, the QTG should be based on validation data from the previously
validated avionics configuration and supplemental avionics-specific
flight test data sufficient to validate the alternate avionics revision.
Additional flight test validation data may not be needed if the avionics
changes were certified without the need for testing with a comprehensive
flight instrumentation package. The airplane manufacturer should
coordinate flight simulator data requirements, in advance with the
responsible Flight Standards office.
(5) A matrix or ``roadmap'' should be provided with the QTG
indicating the appropriate validation data source for each test. The
roadmap should include identification of the revision state of those
contributory avionics systems that could affect specific test responses
if changed.

15. Transport Delay Testing

a. This paragraph explains how to determine the introduced transport
delay through the flight simulator system so that it does not exceed a
specific time delay. The transport delay should be measured from control
inputs through the interface, through each of the host computer modules
and back through the interface to motion, flight instrument, and visual
systems. The transport delay should not exceed the maximum allowable
interval.
b. Four specific examples of transport delay are:
(1) Simulation of classic non-computer controlled aircraft;
(2) Simulation of computer controlled aircraft using real airplane
black boxes;
(3) Simulation of computer controlled aircraft using software
emulation of airplane boxes;
(4) Simulation using software avionics or re-hosted instruments.
c. Figure A2C illustrates the total transport delay for a non-
computer-controlled airplane or the classic transport delay test. Since
there are no airplane-induced delays for this case, the total transport
delay is equivalent to the introduced delay.
d. Figure A2D illustrates the transport delay testing method using
the real airplane controller system.
e. To obtain the induced transport delay for the motion, instrument
and visual signal, the delay induced by the airplane controller should
be subtracted from the total transport delay. This difference represents
the introduced delay and should not exceed the standards prescribed in
Table A1A.
f. Introduced transport delay is measured from the flight deck
control input to the reaction of the instruments and motion and visual
systems (See Figure A2C).
g. The control input may also be introduced after the airplane
controller system and the introduced transport delay measured directly
from the control input to the reaction of the instruments, and simulator
motion and visual systems (See Figure A2D).
h. Figure A2E illustrates the transport delay testing method used on
a flight simulator that uses a software emulated airplane controller
system.
i. It is not possible to measure the introduced transport delay
using the simulated airplane controller system architecture for the
pitch, roll and yaw axes. Therefore, the signal should be measured
directly from the pilot controller. The flight simulator manufacturer
should measure the total transport delay and subtract the inherent delay
of the actual airplane components because the real airplane controller
system has an inherent delay provided by the airplane manufacturer. The
flight simulator manufacturer should ensure that the introduced delay
does not exceed the standards prescribed in Table A1A.
j. Special measurements for instrument signals for flight simulators
using a real airplane instrument display system instead of a simulated
or re-hosted display. For flight instrument systems, the total transport
delay should be measured and the inherent delay of the actual airplane
components subtracted to ensure that the introduced delay does not
exceed the standards prescribed in Table A1A.
(1) Figure A2FA illustrates the transport delay procedure without
airplane display simulation. The introduced delay consists of the delay
between the control movement and the instrument change on the data bus.
(2) Figure A2FB illustrates the modified testing method required to
measure introduced delay due to software avionics or re-hosted
instruments. The total simulated instrument transport delay is measured
and the airplane delay should be subtracted from this total. This
difference represents the introduced delay and should not exceed the
standards prescribed in Table A1A. The inherent delay of the airplane
between the data bus and the displays is indicated in figure A2FA. The
display manufacturer should provide this delay time.
k. Recorded signals. The signals recorded to conduct the transport
delay calculations should be explained on a schematic block diagram. The
flight simulator manufacturer should also provide an explanation of why
each signal was selected and how they relate to the above descriptions.
l. Interpretation of results. Flight simulator results vary over
time from test to test

[[Page 101]]

due to ``sampling uncertainty.'' All flight simulators run at a specific
rate where all modules are executed sequentially in the host computer.
The flight controls input can occur at any time in the iteration, but
these data will not be processed before the start of the new iteration.
For example, a flight simulator running at 60 Hz may have a difference
of as much as 16.67 msec between test results. This does not mean that
the test has failed. Instead, the difference is attributed to variations
in input processing. In some conditions, the host simulator and the
visual system do not run at the same iteration rate, so the output of
the host computer to the visual system will not always be synchronized.
m. The transport delay test should account for both daylight and
night modes of operation of the visual system. In both cases, the
tolerances prescribed in Table A1A must be met and the motion response
should occur before the end of the first video scan containing new
information.

[[Page 102]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.003


[[Page 103]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.004

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

16. Continuing Qualification Evaluations--Validation Test Data
Presentation

a. Background

(1) The MQTG is created during the initial evaluation of a flight
simulator. This is the master document, as amended, to which flight
simulator continuing qualification evaluation test results are compared.
(2) The currently accepted method of presenting continuing
qualification evaluation test results is to provide flight simulator
results over-plotted with reference data. Test results are carefully
reviewed to determine if the test is within the specified tolerances.
This can be a time consuming process, particularly when reference data
exhibits rapid variations or an apparent anomaly requiring engineering
judgment in the application of the tolerances. In these cases, the
solution is to compare the results to the MQTG. The continuing
qualification results are compared to the results in the MQTG for
acceptance. The flight simulator operator and the responsible Flight
Standards office should look for any change in the flight simulator
performance since initial qualification.

b. Continuing Qualification Evaluation Test Results Presentation

(1) Flight simulator operators are encouraged to over-plot
continuing qualification validation test results with MQTG flight
simulator results recorded during the initial evaluation and as amended.
Any change in a validation test will be readily apparent. In addition to
plotting continuing qualification validation test and MQTG results,
operators may elect to plot reference data as well.
(2) There are no suggested tolerances between flight simulator
continuing qualification and MQTG validation test results. Investigation
of any discrepancy between the MQTG and continuing qualification flight
simulator performance is left to the discretion of the flight simulator
operator and the responsible Flight Standards office.

[[Page 104]]

(3) Differences between the two sets of results, other than
variations attributable to repeatability issues that cannot be
explained, should be investigated.
(4) The flight simulator should retain the ability to over-plot both
automatic and manual validation test results with reference data.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

17. Alternative Data Sources, Procedures, and Instrumentation: Level A
and Level B Simulators Only

a. Sponsors are not required to use the alternative data sources,
procedures, and instrumentation. However, a sponsor may choose to use
one or more of the alternative sources, procedures, and instrumentation
described in Table A2E.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

b. It has become standard practice for experienced simulator
manufacturers to use modeling techniques to establish data bases for new
simulator configurations while awaiting the availability of actual
flight test data. The data generated from the aerodynamic modeling
techniques is then compared to the flight test data when it becomes
available. The results of such comparisons have become increasingly
consistent, indicating that these techniques, applied with the
appropriate experience, are dependable and accurate for the development
of aerodynamic models for use in Level A and Level B simulators.
c. Based on this history of successful comparisons, the responsible
Flight Standards office has concluded that those who are experienced in
the development of aerodynamic models may use modeling techniques to
alter the method for acquiring flight test data for Level A or Level B
simulators.
d. The information in Table A2E (Alternative Data Sources,
Procedures, and Instrumentation) is presented to describe an acceptable
alternative to data sources for simulator modeling and validation and an
acceptable alternative to the procedures and instrumentation
traditionally used to gather such modeling and validation data.
(1) Alternative data sources that may be used for part or all of a
data requirement are the Airplane Maintenance Manual, the Airplane
Flight Manual (AFM), Airplane Design Data, the Type Inspection Report
(TIR), Certification Data or acceptable supplemental flight test data.
(2) The sponsor should coordinate with the responsible Flight
Standards office prior to using alternative data sources in a flight
test or data gathering effort.
e. The responsible Flight Standards office position regarding the
use of these alternative data sources, procedures, and instrumentation
is based on the following presumptions:
(1) Data gathered through the alternative means does not require
angle of attack (AOA) measurements or control surface position
measurements for any flight test. However, AOA can be sufficiently
derived if the flight test program ensures the collection of acceptable
level, unaccelerated, trimmed flight data. All of the simulator time
history tests that begin in level, unaccelerated, and trimmed flight,
including the three basic trim tests and ``fly-by'' trims, can be a
successful validation of angle of attack by comparison with flight test
pitch angle. (Note: Due to the criticality of angle of attack in the
development of the ground effects model, particularly critical for
normal landings and landings involving cross-control input applicable to
Level B simulators, stable ``fly-by'' trim data will be the acceptable
norm for normal and cross-control input landing objective data for these
applications.)
(2) The use of a rigorously defined and fully mature simulation
controls system model that includes accurate gearing and cable stretch
characteristics (where applicable), determined from actual aircraft
measurements. Such a model does not require control surface position
measurements in the flight test objective data in these limited
applications.
f. The sponsor is urged to contact the responsible Flight Standards
office for clarification of any issue regarding airplanes with
reversible control systems. Table A2E is not applicable to Computer
Controlled Aircraft FFSs.
g. Utilization of these alternate data sources, procedures, and
instrumentation (Table A2E) does not relieve the sponsor from compliance
with the balance of the information contained in this document relative
to Level A or Level B FFSs.
h. The term ``inertial measurement system'' is used in the following
table to include the use of a functional global positioning system
(GPS).
i. Synchronized video for the use of alternative data sources,
procedures, and instrumentation should have:
(1) Sufficient resolution to allow magnification of the display to
make appropriate measurement and comparisons; and
(2) Sufficient size and incremental marking to allow similar
measurement and comparison. The detail provided by the video should
provide sufficient clarity and accuracy to measure the necessary
parameter(s) to at least \1/2\ of the tolerance authorized for

[[Page 105]]

the specific test being conducted and allow an integration of the
parameter(s) in question to obtain a rate of change.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

Table A2E--Alternative Data Sources, Procedures, and Instrumentation
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
QPS REQUIREMENTS The standards in this table are required if the data gathering            Information
methods described in paragraph 9 of Appendix A are not used.              -------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table of objective tests            Sim level       Alternative data sources,
--------------------------------------------------------        procedures, and                   Notes
Test entry number and title          A        B            instrumentation
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.a.1. Performance. Taxi. Minimum           X        X   TIR, AFM, or Design data may
Radius turn.                                             be used.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.a.2. Performance. Taxi Rate of Turn                X   Data may be acquired by using  A single procedure may
vs. Nosewheel Steering Angle.                            a constant tiller position,    not be adequate for all
measured with a protractor     airplane steering
or full rudder pedal           systems, therefore
application for steady state   appropriate measurement
turn, and synchronized video   procedures must be
of heading indicator. If       devised and proposed
less than full rudder pedal    for the responsible
is used, pedal position must   Flight Standards office
be recorded..                  concurrence.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.b.1. Performance. Takeoff. Ground         X        X   Preliminary certification
Acceleration Time and Distance.                          data may be used. Data may
be acquired by using a stop
watch, calibrated airspeed,
and runway markers during a
takeoff with power set
before brake release. Power
settings may be hand
recorded. If an inertial
measurement system is
installed, speed and
distance may be derived from
acceleration measurements.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.b.2. Performance. Takeoff. Minimum        X        X   Data may be acquired by using  Rapid throttle
Control Speed--ground (Vmcg) using                       an inertial measurement        reductions at speeds
aerodynamic controls only (per                           system and a synchronized      near Vmcg may be used
applicable airworthiness standard)                       video of calibrated airplane   while recording
or low speed, engine inoperative                         instruments and force/         appropriate parameters.
ground control characteristics.                          position measurements of       The nosewheel must be
flight deck controls.          free to caster, or
equivalently freed of
sideforce generation.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.b.3. Performance. Takeoff. Minimum        X        X   Data may be acquired by using
Unstick Speed (Vmu) or equivalent                        an inertial measurement
test to demonstrate early rotation                       system and a synchronized
takeoff characteristics.                                 video of calibrated airplane
instruments and the force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.b.4. Performance. Takeoff. Normal         X        X   Data may be acquired by using
Takeoff.                                                 an inertial measurement
system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls. AOA
can be calculated from pitch
attitude and flight path.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.b.5. Performance. Takeoff. Critical       X        X   Data may be acquired by using  Record airplane dynamic
Engine Failure during Takeoff.                           an inertial measurement        response to engine
system and a synchronized      failure and control
video of calibrated airplane   inputs required to
instruments and force/         correct flight path.
position measurements of
flight deck controls.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.b.6. Performance. Takeoff.                X        X   Data may be acquired by using  The ``1:7 law'' to 100
Crosswind Takeoff.                                       an inertial measurement        feet (30 meters) is an
system and a synchronized      acceptable wind
video of calibrated airplane   profile.
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 106]]


1.b.7. Performance. Takeoff. Rejected       X        X   Data may be acquired with a
Takeoff.                                                 synchronized video of
calibrated airplane
instruments, thrust lever
position, engine parameters,
and distance (e.g., runway
markers). A stop watch is
required..
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.c. 1. Performance. Climb. Normal          X        X   Data may be acquired with a
Climb all engines operating..                            synchronized video of
calibrated airplane
instruments and engine power
throughout the climb range.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.c.2. Performance. Climb. One engine       X        X   Data may be acquired with a
Inoperative Climb.                                       synchronized video of
calibrated airplane
instruments and engine power
throughout the climb range.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.c.4. Performance. Climb. One Engine       X        X   Data may be acquired with a
Inoperative Approach Climb (if                           synchronized video of
operations in icing conditions are                       calibrated airplane
authorized).                                             instruments and engine power
throughout the climb range.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.d.1. Cruise/Descent. Level flight         X        X   Data may be acquired with a
acceleration..                                           synchronized video of
calibrated airplane
instruments, thrust lever
position, engine parameters,
and elapsed time.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.d.2. Cruise/Descent. Level flight         X        X   Data may be acquired with a
deceleration..                                           synchronized video of
calibrated airplane
instruments, thrust lever
position, engine parameters,
and elapsed time.
1.d.4. Cruise/Descent. Idle descent..       X        X   Data may be acquired with a
synchronized video of
calibrated airplane
instruments, thrust lever
position, engine parameters,
and elapsed time.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.d.5. Cruise/Descent. Emergency            X        X   Data may be acquired with a
Descent.                                                 synchronized video of
calibrated airplane
instruments, thrust lever
position, engine parameters,
and elapsed time.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.e.1. Performance. Stopping.               X        X   Data may be acquired during
Deceleration time and distance,                          landing tests using a stop
using manual application of wheel                        watch, runway markers, and a
brakes and no reverse thrust on a                        synchronized video of
dry runway.                                              calibrated airplane
instruments, thrust lever
position and the pertinent
parameters of engine power.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.e.2. Performance. Ground.                 X        X   Data may be acquired during
Deceleration Time and Distance,                          landing tests using a stop
using reverse thrust and no wheel                        watch, runway markers, and a
brakes.                                                  synchronized video of
calibrated airplane
instruments, thrust lever
position and pertinent
parameters of engine power.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.f.1. Performance. Engines.                X        X   Data may be acquired with a
Acceleration.                                            synchronized video recording
of engine instruments and
throttle position.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.f.2. Performance. Engines.                X        X   Data may be acquired with a
Deceleration.                                            synchronized video recording
of engine instruments and
throttle position.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 107]]


2.a.1.a.Handling Qualities. Static          X        X   Surface position data may be   For airplanes with
Control Checks. Pitch Controller                         acquired from flight data      reversible control
Position vs. Force and Surface                           recorder (FDR) sensor or, if   systems, surface
Position Calibration.                                    no FDR sensor, at selected,    position data
significant column positions   acquisition should be
(encompassing significant      accomplished with winds
column position data           less than 5 kts.
points), acceptable to the
responsible Flight Standards
office, using a control
surface protractor on the
ground. Force data may be
acquired by using a hand
held force gauge at the same
column position data points..
2.a.2.a. Handling Qualities. Static         X        X   Surface position data may be   For airplanes with
Control Checks. Roll Controller                          acquired from flight data      reversible control
Position vs. Force and Surface                           recorder (FDR) sensor or, if   systems, surface
Position Calibration.                                    no FDR sensor, at selected,    position data
significant wheel positions    acquisition should be
(encompassing significant      accomplished with winds
wheel position data points),   less than 5 kts.
acceptable to the
responsible Flight Standards
office, using a control
surface protractor on the
ground. Force data may be
acquired by using a hand
held force gauge at the same
wheel position data points..
2.a.3.a.Handling Qualities. Static          X        X   Surface position data may be   For airplanes with
Control Checks. Rudder Pedal                             acquired from flight data      reversible control
Position vs. Force and Surface                           recorder (FDR) sensor or, if   systems, surface
Position Calibration.                                    no FDR sensor, at selected,    position data
significant rudder pedal       acquisition should be
positions (encompassing        accomplished with winds
significant rudder pedal       less than 5 kts.
position data points),
acceptable to the
responsible Flight Standards
office, using a control
surface protractor on the
ground. Force data may be
acquired by using a hand
held force gauge at the same
rudder pedal position data
points..
2.a.4. Handling Qualities. Static           X        X   Breakout data may be acquired
Control Checks. Nosewheel Steering                       with a hand held force
Controller Force and Position.                           gauge. The remainder of the
force to the stops may be
calculated if the force
gauge and a protractor are
used to measure force after
breakout for at least 25% of
the total displacement
capability.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.a.5. Handling Qualities. Static           X        X   Data may be acquired through
Control Checks. Rudder Pedal                             the use of force pads on the
Steering Calibration.                                    rudder pedals and a pedal
position measurement device,
together with design data
for nosewheel position.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.a.6. Handling Qualities. Static           X        X   Data may be acquired through
Control Checks. Pitch Trim Indicator                     calculations.
vs. Surface Position Calibration.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.a.7. Handling qualities. Static           X        X   Data may be acquired by using
control tests. Pitch trim rate.                          a synchronized video of
pitch trim indication and
elapsed time through range
of trim indication.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.a.8. Handling Qualities. Static           X        X   Data may be acquired through
Control tests. Alignment of Flight                       the use of a temporary
deck Throttle Lever Angle vs.                            throttle quadrant scale to
Selected engine parameter.                               document throttle position.
Use a synchronized video to
record steady state
instrument readings or hand-
record steady state engine
performance readings.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 108]]


2.a.9. Handling qualities. Static           X        X   Use of design or predicted
control tests. Brake pedal position                      data is acceptable. Data may
vs. force and brake system pressure                      be acquired by measuring
calibration.                                             deflection at ``zero'' and
``maximum'' and calculating
deflections between the
extremes using the airplane
design data curve.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.c.1. Handling qualities.                  X        X   Data may be acquired by using
Longitudinal control tests. Power                        an inertial measurement
change dynamics.                                         system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and throttle
position.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.c.2. Handling qualities.                  X        X   Data may be acquired by using
Longitudinal control tests. Flap/                        an inertial measurement
slat change dynamics.                                    system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and flap/slat
position.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.c.3. Handling qualities.                  X        X   Data may be acquired by using
Longitudinal control tests. Spoiler/                     an inertial measurement
speedbrake change dynamics.                              system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and spoiler/
speedbrake position.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.c.4. Handling qualities.                  X        X   Data may be acquired by using
Longitudinal control tests. Gear                         an inertial measurement
change dynamics.                                         system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and gear
position.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.c.5. Handling qualities.                  X        X   Data may be acquired through
Longitudinal control tests.                              use of an inertial
Longitudinal trim.                                       measurement system and a
synchronized video of flight
deck controls position
(previously calibrated to
show related surface
position) and the engine
instrument readings.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.c.6. Handling qualities.                  X        X   Data may be acquired through
Longitudinal control tests.                              the use of an inertial
Longitudinal maneuvering stability                       measurement system and a
(stick force/g).                                         synchronized video of
calibrated airplane
instruments; a temporary,
high resolution bank angle
scale affixed to the
attitude indicator; and a
wheel and column force
measurement indication.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.c.7. Handling qualities.                  X        X   Data may be acquired through
Longitudinal control tests.                              the use of a synchronized
Longitudinal static stability.                           video of airplane flight
instruments and a hand held
force gauge.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.c.8. Handling qualities.                  X        X   Data may be acquired through   Airspeeds may be cross
Longitudinal control tests. Stall                        a synchronized video           checked with those in
characteristics.                                         recording of a stop watch      the TIR and AFM.
and calibrated airplane
airspeed indicator. Hand-
record the flight conditions
and airplane configuration.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.c.9. Handling qualities.                  X        X   Data may be acquired by using
Longitudinal control tests. Phugoid                      an inertial measurement
dynamics.                                                system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.c.10. Handling qualities.                          X   Data may be acquired by using
Longitudinal control tests. Short                        an inertial measurement
period dynamics.                                         system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 109]]


2.d.1. Handling qualities. Lateral          X        X   Data may be acquired by using
directional tests. Minimum control                       an inertial measurement
speed, air (Vmca or Vmci), per                           system and a synchronized
applicable airworthiness standard or                     video of calibrated airplane
Low speed engine inoperative                             instruments and force/
handling characteristics in the air.                     position measurements of
flight deck controls.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.d.2. Handling qualities. Lateral          X        X   Data may be acquired by using  May be combined with
directional tests. Roll response                         an inertial measurement        step input of flight
(rate).                                                  system and a synchronized      deck roll controller
video of calibrated airplane   test, 2.d.3.
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck lateral controls.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.d.3. Handling qualities. Lateral          X        X   Data may be acquired by using
directional tests. Roll response to                      an inertial measurement
flight deck roll controller step                         system and a synchronized
input.                                                   video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck lateral controls.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.d.4. Handling qualities. Lateral          X        X   Data may be acquired by using
directional tests. Spiral stability.                     an inertial measurement
system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments; force/position
measurements of flight deck
controls; and a stop watch.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.d.5. Handling qualities. Lateral          X        X   Data may be hand recorded in-  Trimming during second
directional tests. Engine                                flight using high resolution   segment climb is not a
inoperative trim.                                        scales affixed to trim         certification task and
controls that have been        should not be conducted
calibrated on the ground       until a safe altitude
using protractors on the       is reached.
control/trim surfaces with
winds less than 5 kts.OR
Data may be acquired during
second segment climb (with
proper pilot control input
for an engine-out condition)
by using a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.d.6. Handling qualities. Lateral          X        X   Data may be acquired by using
directional tests. Rudder response.                      an inertial measurement
system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
rudder pedals.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.d.7. Handling qualities. Lateral          X        X   Data may be acquired by using
directional tests. Dutch roll, (yaw                      an inertial measurement
damper OFF).                                             system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.d.8. Handling qualities. Lateral          X        X   Data may be acquired by using
directional tests. Steady state                          an inertial measurement
sideslip.                                                system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls.
Ground track and wind
corrected heading may be
used for sideslip angle.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.e.1. Handling qualities. Landings.                 X   Data may be acquired by using
Normal landing.                                          an inertial measurement
system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 110]]


2.e.3. Handling qualities. Landings.                 X   Data may be acquired by using
Crosswind landing.                                       an inertial measurement
system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.e.4. Handling qualities. Landings.                 X   Data may be acquired by using
One engine inoperative landing.                          an inertial measurement
system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and the force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls. Normal
and lateral accelerations
may be recorded in lieu of
AOA and sideslip.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.e.5. Handling qualities. Landings.   .......       X   Data may be acquired by using
Autopilot landing (if applicable).                       an inertial measurement
system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls.Normal
and lateral accelerations
may be recorded in lieu of
AOA and sideslip.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.e.6. Handling qualities. Landings.   .......       X   Data may be acquired by using
All engines operating, autopilot, go                     an inertial measurement
around.                                                  system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls. Normal
and lateral accelerations
may be recorded in lieu of
AOA and sideslip.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.e.7. Handling qualities. Landings.                 X   Data may be acquired by using
One engine inoperative go around.                        an inertial measurement
system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls. Normal
and lateral accelerations
may be recorded in lieu of
AOA and sideslip.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.e.8. Handling qualities. Landings.                 X   Data may be acquired by using
Directional control (rudder                              an inertial measurement
effectiveness with symmetric thrust).                    system and a synchronized
video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls. Normal
and lateral accelerations
may be recorded in lieu of
AOA and sideslip.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.e.9. Handling qualities. Landings.                 X   Data may be acquired by using
Directional control (rudder                              an inertial measurement
effectiveness with asymmetric                            system and a synchronized
reverse thrust).                                         video of calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls. Normal
and lateral accelerations
may be recorded in lieu of
AOA and sideslip.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.f. Handling qualities. Ground                      X   Data may be acquired by using  ........................
effect. Test to demonstrate ground                       calibrated airplane
effect.                                                  instruments, an inertial
measurement system, and a
synchronized video of
calibrated airplane
instruments and force/
position measurements of
flight deck controls.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 111]]

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

Attachment 3 to Appendix A to Part 60--Simulator Subjective Evaluation

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

1. Requirements

a. Except for special use airport models, described as Class III,
all airport models required by this part must be representations of
real-world, operational airports or representations of fictional
airports and must meet the requirements set out in Tables A3B or A3C of
this attachment, as appropriate.
b. If fictional airports are used, the sponsor must ensure that
navigational aids and all appropriate maps, charts, and other
navigational reference material for the fictional airports (and
surrounding areas as necessary) are compatible, complete, and accurate
with respect to the visual presentation of the airport model of this
fictional airport. An SOC must be submitted that addresses navigation
aid installation and performance and other criteria (including
obstruction clearance protection) for all instrument approaches to the
fictional airports that are available in the simulator. The SOC must
reference and account for information in the terminal instrument
procedures manual and the construction and availability of the required
maps, charts, and other navigational material. This material must be
clearly marked ``for training purposes only.''
c. When the simulator is being used by an instructor or evaluator
for purposes of training, checking, or testing under this chapter, only
airport models classified as Class I, Class II, or Class III may be used
by the instructor or evaluator. Detailed descriptions/definitions of
these classifications are found in Appendix F of this part.
d. When a person sponsors an FFS maintained by a person other than a
U.S. certificate holder, the sponsor is accountable for that FFS
originally meeting, and continuing to meet, the criteria under which it
was originally qualified and the appropriate Part 60 criteria, including
the airport models that may be used by instructors or evaluators for
purposes of training, checking, or testing under this chapter.
e. Neither Class II nor Class III airport visual models are required
to appear on the SOQ, and the method used for keeping instructors and
evaluators apprised of the airport models that meet Class II or Class
III requirements on any given simulator is at the option of the sponsor,
but the method used must be available for review by the TPAA.
f. When an airport model represents a real world airport and a
permanent change is made to that real world airport (e.g., a new runway,
an extended taxiway, a new lighting system, a runway closure) without a
written extension grant from the responsible Flight Standards office
(described in paragraph 1.g. of this section), an update to that airport
model must be made in accordance with the following time limits:
(1) For a new airport runway, a runway extension, a new airport
taxiway, a taxiway extension, or a runway/taxiway closure--within 90
days of the opening for use of the new airport runway, runway extension,
new airport taxiway, or taxiway extension; or within 90 days of the
closure of the runway or taxiway.
(2) For a new or modified approach light system--within 45 days of
the activation of the new or modified approach light system.
(3) For other facility or structural changes on the airport (e.g.,
new terminal, relocation of Air Traffic Control Tower)--within 180 days
of the opening of the new or changed facility or structure.
g. If a sponsor desires an extension to the time limit for an update
to a visual scene or airport model or has an objection to what must be
updated in the specific airport model requirement, the sponsor must
provide a written extension request to the responsible Flight Standards
office stating the reason for the update delay and a proposed completion
date, or explain why the update is not necessary (i.e., why the
identified airport change will not have an impact on flight training,
testing, or checking). A copy of this request or objection must also be
sent to the POI/TCPM. The responsible Flight Standards office will send
the official response to the sponsor and a copy to the POI/TCPM. If
there is an objection, after consultation with the appropriate POI/TCPM
regarding the training, testing, or checking impact, the responsible
Flight Standards office will send the official response to the sponsor
and a copy to the POI/TCPM.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

2. Discussion

a. The subjective tests provide a basis for evaluating the
capability of the simulator to perform over a typical utilization
period; determining that the simulator accurately simulates each
required maneuver, procedure, or task; and verifying correct operation
of the simulator controls, instruments, and systems. The items listed in
the following Tables are for simulator evaluation purposes only. They
may not be used to limit or exceed the authorizations for use of a given
level of simulator, as described on the SOQ, or as approved by the TPAA.

[[Page 112]]

b. The tests in Table A3A, Operations Tasks, in this attachment,
address pilot functions, including maneuvers and procedures (called
flight tasks), and are divided by flight phases. The performance of
these tasks by the responsible Flight Standards office includes an
operational examination of the visual system and special effects. There
are flight tasks included to address some features of advanced
technology airplanes and innovative training programs. For example,
``high angle-of-attack maneuvering'' is included to provide a required
alternative to ``approach to stalls'' for airplanes employing flight
envelope protection functions.
c. The tests in Table A3A, Operations Tasks, and Table A3G,
Instructor Operating Station of this attachment, address the overall
function and control of the simulator including the various simulated
environmental conditions; simulated airplane system operations (normal,
abnormal, and emergency); visual system displays; and special effects
necessary to meet flight crew training, evaluation, or flight experience
requirements.
d. All simulated airplane systems functions will be assessed for
normal and, where appropriate, alternate operations. Normal, abnormal,
and emergency operations associated with a flight phase will be assessed
during the evaluation of flight tasks or events within that flight
phase. Simulated airplane systems are listed separately under ``Any
Flight Phase'' to ensure appropriate attention to systems checks.
Operational navigation systems (including inertial navigation systems,
global positioning systems, or other long-range systems) and the
associated electronic display systems will be evaluated if installed.
The pilot will include in his report to the TPAA, the effect of the
system operation and any system limitation.
e. Simulators demonstrating a satisfactory circling approach will be
qualified for the circling approach maneuver and may be approved for
such use by the TPAA in the sponsor's FAA-approved flight training
program. To be considered satisfactory, the circling approach will be
flown at maximum gross weight for landing, with minimum visibility for
the airplane approach category, and must allow proper alignment with a
landing runway at least 90[deg] different from the instrument approach
course while allowing the pilot to keep an identifiable portion of the
airport in sight throughout the maneuver (reference--14 CFR 91.175(e)).
f. At the request of the TPAA, the responsible Flight Standards
office may assess a device to determine if it is capable of simulating
certain training activities in a sponsor's training program, such as a
portion of a Line Oriented Flight Training (LOFT) scenario. Unless
directly related to a requirement for the qualification level, the
results of such an evaluation would not affect the qualification level
of the simulator. However, if the responsible Flight Standards office
determines that the simulator does not accurately simulate that training
activity, the simulator would not be approved for that training
activity.
g. The FAA intends to allow the use of Class III airport models when
the sponsor provides the TPAA (or other regulatory authority) an
appropriate analysis of the skills, knowledge, and abilities (SKAs)
necessary for competent performance of the tasks in which this
particular media element is used. The analysis should describe the
ability of the FFS/visual media to provide an adequate environment in
which the required SKAs are satisfactorily performed and learned. The
analysis should also include the specific media element, such as the
airport model.
h. The TPAA may accept Class III airport models without individual
observation provided the sponsor provides the TPAA with an acceptable
description of the process for determining the acceptability of a
specific airport model, outlines the conditions under which such an
airport model may be used, and adequately describes what restrictions
will be applied to each resulting airport or landing area model.
Examples of situations that may warrant Class_III model designation by
the TPAA include the following:
(a) Training, testing, or checking on very low visibility
operations, including SMGCS operations.
(b) Instrument operations training (including instrument takeoff,
departure, arrival, approach, and missed approach training, testing, or
checking) using--
(i) A specific model that has been geographically ``moved'' to a
different location and aligned with an instrument procedure for another
airport.
(ii) A model that does not match changes made at the real-world
airport (or landing area for helicopters) being modeled.
(iii) A model generated with an ``off-board'' or an ``on-board''
model development tool (by providing proper latitude/longitude
reference; correct runway or landing area orientation, length, width,
marking, and lighting information; and appropriate adjacent taxiway
location) to generate a facsimile of a real world airport or landing
area.
i. Previously qualified simulators with certain early generation
Computer Generated Image (CGI) visual systems, are limited by the
capability of the Image Generator or the display system used. These
systems are:
(1) Early CGI visual systems that are excepted from the requirement
of including runway numbers as a part of the specific runway marking
requirements are:
(a) Link NVS and DNVS.
(b) Novoview 2500 and 6000.
(c) FlightSafety VITAL series up to, and including, VITAL III, but
not beyond.
(d) Redifusion SP1, SP1T, and SP2.

[[Page 113]]

(2) Early CGI visual systems are excepted from the requirement of
including runway numbers unless the runways are used for LOFT training
sessions. These LOFT airport models require runway numbers but only for
the specific runway end (one direction) used in the LOFT session. The
systems required to display runway numbers only for LOFT scenes are:
(a) FlightSafety VITAL IV.
(b) Redifusion SP3 and SP3T.
(c) Link-Miles Image II.
(3) The following list of previously qualified CGI and display
systems are incapable of generating blue lights. These systems are not
required to have accurate taxi-way edge lighting:
(a) Redifusion SP1.
(b) FlightSafety Vital IV.
(c) Link-Miles Image II and Image IIT
(d) XKD displays (even though the XKD image generator is capable of
generating blue colored lights, the display cannot accommodate that
color).

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

[[Page 114]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.050


[[Page 115]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.051


[[Page 116]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.052


[[Page 117]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.053


[[Page 118]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.054


[[Page 119]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.055


[[Page 120]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.056


[[Page 121]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.057


[[Page 122]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.058


[[Page 123]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.059


[[Page 124]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.060


[[Page 125]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.061


[[Page 126]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.062


[[Page 127]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.063


[[Page 128]]



Table A3C--Functions and Subjective Tests
------------------------------------------------------------------------
QPS requirements
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additional airport models beyond    Simulator level
minimum required for       -------------------
Entry No.       qualification--Class II airport
models                A    B    C    D
------------------------------------------------------------------------
This table specifies the minimum airport model content and functionality
necessary to add airport models to a simulator's model library, beyond
those necessary for qualification at the stated level, without the
necessity of further involvement of the responsible Flight Standards
office or TPAA.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Begin QPS Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1................  Airport model management. The following is the
minimum airport model management requirements for
simulators at Levels A, B, C, and D.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.a..........  The direction of strobe lights,     X    X    X    X
approach lights, runway edge
lights, visual landing aids,
runway centerline lights,
threshold lights, and touchdown
zone lights on the ``in-use''
runway must be replicated.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2................  Visual feature recognition. The following are the
minimum distances at which runway features must be
visible for simulators at Levels A, B, C, and D.
Distances are measured from runway threshold to an
airplane aligned with the runway on an extended
3[deg] glide-slope in simulated meteorological
conditions that recreate the minimum distances for
visibility. For circling approaches, all
requirements of this section apply to the runway
used for the initial approach and to the runway of
intended landing.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.a..........  Runway definition, strobe lights,   X    X    X    X
approach lights, and runway edge
white lights from 5 sm (8 km)
from the runway threshold.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.b..........  Visual Approach Aid lights (VASI              X    X
or PAPI) from 5 sm (8 km) from
the runway threshold.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.c..........  Visual Approach Aid lights (VASI    X    X
or PAPI) from 3 sm (5 km) from
the runway threshold.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.d..........  Runway centerline lights and        X    X    X    X
taxiway definition from 3 sm (5
km) from the runway threshold.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.e..........  Threshold lights and touchdown      X    X    X    X
zone lights from 2 sm (3 km)
from the runway threshold.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.f..........  Runway markings within range of     X    X    X    X
landing lights for night scenes
and as required by the surface
resolution requirements on day
scenes.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.g..........  For circling approaches, the        X    X    X    X
runway of intended landing and
associated lighting must fade
into view in a non-distracting
manner.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3................  Airport model content. The following prescribes the
minimum requirements for what must be provided in an
airport model and identifies other aspects of the
airport environment that must correspond with that
model for simulators at Levels A, B, C, and D. The
detail must be developed using airport pictures,
construction drawings and maps, or other similar
data, or developed in accordance with published
regulatory material; however, this does not require
that airport models contain details that are beyond
the designed capability of the currently qualified
visual system. For circling approaches, all
requirements of this section apply to the runway
used for the initial approach and to the runway of
intended landing. Only one ``primary'' taxi route
from parking to the runway end will be required for
each ``in-use'' runway.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.a..........  The surface and markings for each ``in-use'' runway:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.a.1....  Threshold markings...............   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.a.2....  Runway numbers...................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.a.3....  Touchdown zone markings..........   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.a.4....  Fixed distance markings..........   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.a.5....  Edge markings....................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.a.6....  Centerline stripes...............   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.b..........  The lighting for each ``in-use'' runway
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.b.1....  Threshold lights.................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.b.2....  Edge lights......................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.b.3....  End lights.......................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.b.4....  Centerline lights................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 129]]


3.b.5....  Touchdown zone lights, if           X    X    X    X
appropriate.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.b.6....  Leadoff lights, if appropriate...   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.b.7....  Appropriate visual landing aid(s)   X    X    X    X
for that runway.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.b.8....  Appropriate approach lighting       X    X    X    X
system for that runway.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.c..........  The taxiway surface and markings associated with each
``in-use'' runway:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.c.1....  Edge.............................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.c.2....  Centerline.......................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.c.3....  Runway hold lines................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.c.4....  ILS critical area markings.......   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.d..........  The taxiway lighting associated with each ``in-use''
runway:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.d.1....  Edge.............................             X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.d.2....  Centerline.......................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.d.3....  Runway hold and ILS critical area   X    X    X    X
lights.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4................  Required model correlation with
other aspects of the airport
environment simulation The
following are the minimum model
correlation tests that must be
conducted for simulators at
Levels A, B, C, and D.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.a..........  The airport model must be           X    X    X    X
properly aligned with the
navigational aids that are
associated with operations at
the ``in-use'' runway.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.b..........  Slopes in runways, taxiways, and    X    X    X    X
ramp areas, if depicted in the
visual scene, must not cause
distracting or unrealistic
effects.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5................  Correlation with airplane and associated equipment.
The following are the minimum correlation
comparisons that must be made for simulators at
Levels A, B, C, and D.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.a............  Visual system compatibility with    X    X    X    X
aerodynamic programming.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.b..........  Accurate portrayal of environment   X    X    X    X
relating to flight simulator
attitudes.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.c..........  Visual cues to assess sink rate          X    X    X
and depth perception during
landings.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5.d..........  Visual effects for each visible,         X    X    X
own-ship, airplane external
light(s).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6................  Scene quality. The following are the minimum scene
quality tests that must be conducted for simulators
at Levels A, B, C, and D.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.a..........  Surfaces and textural cues must               X    X
be free of apparent and
distracting quantization
(aliasing).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.b..............  Correct color and realistic                   X    X
textural cues.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.c..............  Light points free from              X    X    X    X
distracting jitter, smearing or
streaking.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7................  Instructor controls of the following: The following
are the minimum instructor controls that must be
available in simulators at Levels A, B, C, and D.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.a..........  Environmental effects, e.g.,        X    X    X    X
cloud base (if used), cloud
effects, cloud density,
visibility in statute miles/
kilometers and RVR in feet/
meters.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.b..........  Airport selection................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.c..........  Airport lighting including          X    X    X    X
variable intensity.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.d..........  Dynamic effects including ground              X    X
and flight traffic.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 130]]


End QPS Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Begin Information
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8................  Sponsors are not required to        X    X    X    X
provide every detail of a
runway, but the detail that is
provided must be correct within
the capabilities of the system.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
End Information
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 131]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.064


[[Page 132]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.065


[[Page 133]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.066


[[Page 134]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.067


[[Page 135]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.068


[[Page 136]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.069


[[Page 137]]


Table A3E--Functions and Subjective Tests
------------------------------------------------------------------------
QPS Requirements
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Simulator level
Entry No.                 Sound system            -------------------
A    B    C    D
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The following checks are performed during a normal flight profile with
motion system ON.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1..............  Precipitation......................             X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2..............  Rain removal equipment.............             X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3..............  Significant airplane noises                     X    X
perceptible to the pilot during
normal operations.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4..............  Abnormal operations for which there             X    X
are associated sound cues
including, engine malfunctions,
landing gear/tire malfunctions,
tail and engine pod strike and
pressurization malfunction.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5..............  Sound of a crash when the flight      X    X
simulator is landed in excess of
limitations.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 138]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.070


[[Page 139]]


Table A3G--Functions and Subjective Tests
------------------------------------------------------------------------
QPS Requirements
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Simulator level
Entry No.               Special effects           -------------------
A    B    C    D
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Functions in this table are subject to evaluation only if appropriate
for the airplane and/or the system is installed on the specific
simulator.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1..............  Simulator Power Switch(es).........   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2..............  Airplane conditions
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.a........  Gross weight, center of gravity,      X    X    X    X
fuel loading and allocation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.b........  Airplane systems status............   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.c........  Ground crew functions (e.g., ext.     X    X    X    X
power, push back).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3..............  Airports
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.a........  Number and selection...............   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.b........  Runway selection...................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.c........  Runway surface condition (e.g.,       X    X
rough, smooth, icy, wet).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.d........  Preset positions (e.g., ramp, gate,   X    X    X    X
1 for takeoff, takeoff position,
over FAF).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.e........  Lighting controls..................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4..............  Environmental controls
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.a........  Visibility (statute miles             X    X    X    X
(kilometers)).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.b........  Runway visual range (in feet          X    X    X    X
(meters)).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.c........  Temperature........................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.d........  Climate conditions (e.g., ice,        X    X    X    X
snow, rain).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.e........  Wind speed and direction...........   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.f........  Windshear..........................   X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.g........  Clouds (base and tops).............   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5..............  Airplane system malfunctions          X    X    X    X
(Inserting and deleting
malfunctions into the simulator).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6..............  Locks, Freezes, and Repositioning
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.a........  Problem (all) freeze/release.......   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.b........  Position (geographic) freeze/         X    X    X    X
release.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.c........  Repositioning (locations, freezes,    X    X    X    X
and releases).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
6.d........  Ground speed control...............   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
7..............  Remote IOS.........................   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8..............  Sound Controls. On/off/adjustment..   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
9..............  Motion/Control Loading System
------------------------------------------------------------------------
9.a........  On/off/emergency stop..............   X    X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
10.............  Observer Seats/Stations. Position/    X    X    X    X
Adjustment/Positive restraint
system.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 140]]

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

1. Introduction

a. The following is an example test schedule for an Initial/Upgrade
evaluation that covers the majority of the requirements set out in the
Functions and Subjective test requirements. It is not intended that the
schedule be followed line by line, rather, the example should be used as
a guide for preparing a schedule that is tailored to the airplane,
sponsor, and training task.
b. Functions and subjective tests should be planned. This
information has been organized as a reference document with the
considerations, methods, and evaluation notes for each individual aspect
of the simulator task presented as an individual item. In this way the
evaluator can design his or her own test plan, using the appropriate
sections to provide guidance on method and evaluation criteria. Two
aspects should be present in any test plan structure:
(1) An evaluation of the simulator to determine that it replicates
the aircraft and performs reliably for an uninterrupted period
equivalent to the length of a typical training session.
(2) The simulator should be capable of operating reliably after the
use of training device functions such as repositions or malfunctions.
c. A detailed understanding of the training task will naturally lead
to a list of objectives that the simulator should meet. This list will
form the basis of the test plan. Additionally, once the test plan has
been formulated, the initial conditions and the evaluation criteria
should be established. The evaluator should consider all factors that
may have an influence on the characteristics observed during particular
training tasks in order to make the test plan successful.

2. Events

a. Initial Conditions

(1) Airport.
(2) QNH.
(3) Temperature.
(4) Wind/Crosswind.
(5) Zero Fuel Weight /Fuel/Gross Weight /Center of Gravity.

b. Initial Checks

(1) Documentation of Simulator.
(a) Simulator Acceptance Test Manuals.
(b) Simulator Approval Test Guide.
(c) Technical Logbook Open Item List.
(d) Daily Functional Pre-flight Check.
(2) Documentation of User/Carrier Flight Logs.
(a) Simulator Operating/Instructor Manual.
(b) Difference List (Aircraft/Simulator).
(c) Flight Crew Operating Manuals.
(d) Performance Data for Different Fields.
(e) Crew Training Manual.
(f) Normal/Abnormal/Emergency Checklists.
(3) Simulator External Checks.
(a) Appearance and Cleanliness.
(b) Stairway/Access Bridge.
(c) Emergency Rope Ladders.
(d) ``Motion On''/``Flight in Progress'' Lights.
(4) Simulator Internal Checks.
(a) Cleaning/Disinfecting Towels (for cleaning oxygen masks).
(b) Flight deck Layout (compare with difference list).
(5) Equipment.
(a) Quick Donning Oxygen Masks.
(b) Head Sets.
(c) Smoke Goggles.
(d) Sun Visors.
(e) Escape Rope.
(f) Chart Holders.
(g) Flashlights.
(h) Fire Extinguisher (inspection date).
(i) Crash Axe.
(j) Gear Pins.

c. Power Supply and APU Start Checks

(1) Batteries and Static Inverter.
(2) APU Start with Battery.
(3) APU Shutdown using Fire Handle.
(4) External Power Connection.
(5) APU Start with External Power.
(6) Abnormal APU Start/Operation.

d. Flight deck Checks

(1) Flight deck Preparation Checks.
(2) FMC Programming.
(3) Communications and Navigational Aids Checks.

e. Engine Start

(1) Before Start Checks.
(2) Battery start with Ground Air Supply Unit.
(3) Engine Crossbleed Start.
(4) Normal Engine Start.
(5) Abnormal Engine Starts.
(6) Engine Idle Readings.
(7) After Start Checks.

f. Taxi Checks

(1) Pushback/Powerback.
(2) Taxi Checks.
(3) Ground Handling Check:
(a) Power required to initiate ground roll.
(b) Thrust response.
(c) Nosewheel and Pedal Steering.
(d) Nosewheel Scuffing.
(e) Perform 180 degree turns.
(f) Brakes Response and Differential Braking using Normal, Alternate
and Emergency.
(g) Brake Systems.
(h) Eye height and fore/aft position.
(4) Runway Roughness.

[[Page 141]]

g. Visual Scene--Ground Assessment. Select 3 different airport
models and perform the following checks with Day, Dusk and Night
selected, as appropriate:
(1) Visual Controls.
(a) Daylight, Dusk, Night Scene Controls.
(b) Flight deck ``Daylight'' ambient lighting.
(c) Environment Light Controls.
(d) Runway Light Controls.
(e) Taxiway Light Controls.
(2) Airport Model Content.
(a) Ramp area for buildings, gates, airbridges, maintenance ground
equipment, parked aircraft.
(b) Daylight shadows, night time light pools.
(c) Taxiways for correct markings, taxiway/runway, marker boards,
CAT I and II/III hold points, taxiway shape/grass areas, taxiway light
(positions and colors).
(d) Runways for correct markings, lead-off lights, boards, runway
slope, runway light positions, and colors, directionality of runway
lights.
(e) Airport environment for correct terrain and significant
features.
(f) Visual scene quantization (aliasing), color, and occulting
levels.
(3) Ground Traffic Selection.
(4) Environment Effects.
(a) Low cloud scene.
(i) Rain:
(A) Runway surface scene.
(B) Windshield wiper--operation and sound.
(ii) Hail:
(A) Runway surface scene.
(B) Windshield wiper--operation and sound.
(b) Lightning/thunder.
(c) Snow/ice runway surface scene.
(d) Fog.
h. Takeoff. Select one or several of the following test cases:
(1) T/O Configuration Warnings.
(2) Engine Takeoff Readings.
(3) Rejected Takeoff (Dry/Wet/Icy Runway) and check the following:
(a) Autobrake function.
(b) Anti-skid operation.
(c) Motion/visual effects during deceleration.
(d) Record stopping distance (use runway plot or runway lights
remaining).
Continue taxiing along the runway while applying brakes and check
the following:
(e) Center line lights alternating red/white for 2000 feet/600
meters.
(f) Center line lights all red for 1000 feet/300 meters.
(g) Runway end, red stop bars.
(h) Braking fade effect.
(i) Brake temperature indications.
(4) Engine Failure between VI and V2.
(5) Normal Takeoff:
(a) During ground roll check the following:
(i) Runway rumble.
(ii) Acceleration cues.
(iii) Groundspeed effects.
(iv) Engine sounds.
(v) Nosewheel and rudder pedal steering.
(b) During and after rotation, check the following:
(i) Rotation characteristics.
(ii) Column force during rotation.
(iii) Gear uplock sounds/bumps.
(iv) Effect of slat/flap retraction during climbout.
(6) Crosswind Takeoff (check the following):
(a) Tendency to turn into or out of the wind.
(b) Tendency to lift upwind wing as airspeed increases.
(7) Windshear during Takeoff (check the following):
(a) Controllable during windshear encounter.
(b) Performance adequate when using correct techniques.
(c) Windshear Indications satisfactory.
(d) Motion cues satisfactory (particularly turbulence).
(8) Normal Takeoff with Control Malfunction.
(9) Low Visibility T/O (check the following):
(a) Visual cues.
(b) Flying by reference to instruments.
(c) SID Guidance on LNAV.
i. Climb Performance. Select one or several of the following test
cases:
(1) Normal Climb--Climb while maintaining recommended speed profile
and note fuel, distance and time.
(2) Single Engine Climb--Trim aircraft in a zero wheel climb at V2.

Note: Up to 5[deg] bank towards the operating engine(s) is
permissible. Climb for 3 minutes and note fuel, distance, and time.
Increase speed toward en route climb speed and retract flaps. Climb for
3 minutes and note fuel, distance, and time.

j. Systems Operation During Climb.
Check normal operation and malfunctions as appropriate for the
following systems:
(1) Air conditioning/Pressurization/Ventilation.
(2) Autoflight.
(3) Communications.
(4) Electrical.
(5) Fuel.
(6) Icing Systems.
(7) Indicating and Recording Systems.
(8) Navigation/FMS.
(9) Pneumatics.
k. Cruise Checks. Select one or several of the following test cases:
(1) Cruise Performance.
(2) High Speed/High Altitude Handling (check the following):
(a) Overspeed warning.
(b) High Speed buffet.
(c) Aircraft control satisfactory.

[[Page 142]]

(d) Envelope limiting functions on Computer Controlled Aircraft.
Reduce airspeed to below level flight buffet onset speed, start a
turn, and check the following:
(e) High Speed buffet increases with G loading.
Reduce throttles to idle and start descent, deploy the speedbrake,
and check the following:
(f) Speedbrake indications.
(g) Symmetrical deployment.
(h) Airframe buffet.
(i) Aircraft response hands off.
(3) Yaw Damper Operation. Switch off yaw dampers and autopilot.
Initiate a Dutch roll and check the following:
(a) Aircraft dynamics.
(b) Simulator motion effects.
Switch on yaw dampers, re-initiate a Dutch roll and check the
following:
(c) Damped aircraft dynamics.
(4) APU Operation.
(5) Engine Gravity Feed.
(6) Engine Shutdown and Driftdown Check: FMC operation Aircraft
performance.
(7) Engine Relight.
l. Descent. Select one of the following test cases:
(1) Normal Descent. Descend while maintaining recommended speed
profile and note fuel, distance and time.
(2) Cabin Depressurization/Emergency Descent.
m. Medium Altitude Checks. Select one or several of the following
test cases:
(1) High Angle of Attack/Stall. Trim the aircraft at 1.4 Vs,
establish 1 kt/sec \2\ deceleration rate, and check the following--
(a) System displays/operation satisfactory.
(b) Handling characteristics satisfactory.
(c) Stall and Stick shaker speed.
(d) Buffet characteristics and onset speed.
(e) Envelope limiting functions on Computer Controlled Aircraft.
Recover to straight and level flight and check the following:
(f) Handling characteristics satisfactory.
(2) Turning Flight. Roll aircraft to left, establish a 30[deg] to
45[deg] bank angle, and check the following:
(a) Stick force required, satisfactory.
(b) Wheel requirement to maintain bank angle.
(c) Slip ball response, satisfactory.
(d) Time to turn 180[deg].
Roll aircraft from 45[deg] bank one way to 45[deg] bank the opposite
direction while maintaining altitude and airspeed--check the following:
(e) Controllability during maneuver.
(3) Degraded flight controls.
(4) Holding Procedure (check the following:)
(a) FMC operation.
(b) Autopilot auto thrust performance.
(5) Storm Selection (check the following:)
(a) Weather radar controls.
(b) Weather radar operation.
(c) Visual scene corresponds with WXR pattern.
(Fly through storm center, and check the following:)
(d) Aircraft enters cloud.
(e) Aircraft encounters representative turbulence.
(f) Rain/hail sound effects evident.
As aircraft leaves storm area, check the following:
(g) Storm effects disappear.
(6) TCAS (check the following:)
(a) Traffic appears on visual display.
(b) Traffic appears on TCAS display(s).
As conflicting traffic approaches, take relevant avoiding action,
and check the following:
(c) Visual and TCAS system displays.
n. Approach and Landing. Select one or several of the following test
cases while monitoring flight control and hydraulic systems for normal
operation and with malfunctions selected:
(1) Flaps/Gear Normal Operation. Check the following:
(a) Time for extension/retraction.
(b) Buffet characteristics.
(2) Normal Visual Approach and Landing.
Fly a normal visual approach and landing--check the following:
(a) Aircraft handling.
(b) Spoiler operation.
(c) Reverse thrust operation.
(d) Directional control on the ground.
(e) Touchdown cues for main and nosewheel.
(f) Visual cues.
(g) Motion cues.
(h) Sound cues.
(i) Brake and anti-skid operation.
(3) Flaps/Gear Abnormal Operation or with hydraulic malfunctions.
(4) Abnormal Wing Flaps/Slats Landing.
(5) Manual Landing with Control Malfunction.
(a) Aircraft handling.
(b) Radio aids and instruments.
(c) Airport model content and cues.
(d) Motion cues.
(e) Sound cues.
(6) Non-precision Approach--All Engines Operating.
(a) Aircraft handling.
(b) Radio Aids and instruments.
(c) Airport model content and cues.
(d) Motion cues.
(e) Sound cues.
(7) Circling Approach.
(a) Aircraft handling.
(c) Radio Aids and instruments.
(d) Airport model content and cues.
(e) Motion cues.
(f) Sound cues.
(8) Non-precision Approach--One Engine Inoperative.

[[Page 143]]

(a) Aircraft handling.
(b) Radio Aids and instruments.
(c) Airport model content and cues.
(d) Motion cues.
(e) Sound cues.
(9) One Engine Inoperative Go-around.
(a) Aircraft handling.
(b) Radio Aids and instruments.
(c) Airport model content and cues.
(d) Motion cues.
(e) Sound cues.
(10) CAT I Approach and Landing with raw-data ILS.
(a) Aircraft handling.
(b) Radio Aids and instruments.
(c) Airport model content and cues.
(d) Motion cues.
(e) Sound cues.
(11) CAT I Approach and Landing with Limiting Crosswind.
(a) Aircraft handling.
(b) Radio Aids and instruments.
(c) Airport model content and cues.
(d) Motion cues.
(e) Sound cues.
(12) CAT I Approach with Windshear. Check the following:
(a) Controllable during windshear encounter.
(b) Performance adequate when using correct techniques.
(c) Windshear indications/warnings.
(d) Motion cues (particularly turbulence).
(13) CAT II Approach and Automatic Go-Around.
(14) CAT III Approach and Landing--System Malfunctions.
(15) CAT III Approach and Landing--1 Engine Inoperative.
(16) GPWS evaluation.
o. Visual Scene--In-Flight Assessment.
Select three (3) different visual models and perform the following
checks with ``day,'' ``dusk,'' and ``night'' (as appropriate) selected.
Reposition the aircraft at or below 2000 feet within 10 nm of the
airfield. Fly the aircraft around the airport environment and assess
control of the visual system and evaluate the Airport model content as
described below:
(1) Visual Controls.
(a) Daylight, Dusk, Night Scene Controls.
(b) Environment Light Controls.
(c) Runway Light Controls.
(d) Taxiway Light Controls.
(e) Approach Light Controls.
(2) Airport model Content.
(a) Airport environment for correct terrain and significant
features.
(b) Runways for correct markings, runway slope, directionality of
runway lights.
(c) Visual scene for quantization (aliasing), color, and occulting.
Reposition the aircraft to a long, final approach for an ``ILS
runway.'' Select flight freeze when the aircraft is 5-statute miles
(sm)/8-kilometers (km) out and on the glide slope. Check the following:
(3) Airport model content.
(a) Airfield features.
(b) Approach lights.
(c) Runway definition.
(d) Runway definition.
(e) Runway edge lights and VASI lights.
(f) Strobe lights.
Release flight freeze. Continue flying the approach with NP engaged.
Select flight freeze when aircraft is 3 sm/5 km out and on the glide
slope. Check the following:
(4) Airport model Content.
(a) Runway centerline light.
(b) Taxiway definition and lights.
Release flight freeze and continue flying the approach with A/P
engaged. Select flight freeze when aircraft is 2 sm/3 km out and on the
glide slope. Check the following:
(5) Airport model content.
(a) Runway threshold lights.
(b) Touchdown zone lights.
At 200 ft radio altitude and still on glide slope, select Flight
Freeze. Check the following:
(6) Airport model content.
(a) Runway markings.
Set the weather to Category I conditions and check the following:
(7) Airport model content.
(a) Visual ground segment.
Set the weather to Category II conditions, release Flight Freeze,
re-select Flight Freeze at 100 feet radio altitude, and check the
following:
(8) Airport model content.
(a) Visual ground segment.
Select night/dusk (twilight) conditions and check the following:
(9) Airport model content.
(a) Runway markings visible within landing light lobes.
Set the weather to Category III conditions, release Flight Freeze,
re-select Flight Freeze at 50 feet radio altitude and check the
following:
(10) Airport model content.
(a) Visual ground segment.
Set WX to a typical ``missed approach? weather condition, release
Flight Freeze, re-select Flight Freeze at 15 feet radio altitude, and
check the following:
(11) Airport model content.
(a) Visual ground segment.
When on the ground, stop the aircraft. Set 0 feet RVR, ensure
strobe/beacon tights are switched on and check the following:
(12) Airport model content.
(a) Visual effect of strobe and beacon.
Reposition to final approach, set weather to ``Clear,'' continue
approach for an automatic landing, and check the following:
(13) Airport model content.
(a) Visual cues during flare to assess sink rate.

[[Page 144]]

(b) Visual cues during flare to assess Depth perception.
(c) Flight deck height above ground.
After Landing Operations.
(1) After Landing Checks.
(2) Taxi back to gate. Check the following:
(a) Visual model satisfactory.
(b) Parking brake operation satisfactory.
(3) Shutdown Checks.
q. Crash Function.
(1) Gear-up Crash.
(2) Excessive rate of descent Crash.
(3) Excessive bank angle Crash.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.005


[[Page 145]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.008


[[Page 146]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.009


[[Page 147]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.010


[[Page 148]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.054


[[Page 149]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.055

Attachment 4 to Appendix A to Part 60--Figure A4D--Sample Qualification
Test Guide Cover Page

INFORMATION

[[Page 150]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.056


[[Page 151]]



Attachment 4 to Appendix A to Part 60--Figure A4E--Sample Statement of
Qualification--Certificate

INFORMATION
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.127


[[Page 152]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.014


[[Page 153]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.015


[[Page 154]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.016


[[Page 155]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.017

Attachment 4 to Appendix A to Part 60--Figure A4H [Reserved]



[[Page 156]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09MY08.019

Attachment 5 to Appendix A to Part 60--Simulator Qualification
Requirements for Windshear Training Program Use

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

1. Applicability

This attachment applies to all simulators, regardless of
qualification level, that are used to satisfy the training requirements
of an FAA-approved low-altitude windshear flight training program, or
any FAA-approved training program that addresses windshear encounters.

2. Statement of Compliance and Capability (SOC)

a. The sponsor must submit an SOC confirming that the aerodynamic
model is based on flight test data supplied by the airplane manufacturer
or other approved data provider. The SOC must also confirm that any
change to environmental wind parameters, including variances in those
parameters for windshear conditions, once inserted for computation,
result in the correct simulated performance. This statement must also
include examples of environmental wind parameters currently evaluated in
the simulator (such as crosswind takeoffs, crosswind approaches, and
crosswind landings).
b. For simulators without windshear warning, caution, or guidance
hardware in the original equipment, the SOC must also state that the
simulation of the added hardware and/or software, including associated
flight deck displays and annunciations, replicates the system(s)
installed in the airplane. The statement must be accompanied by a block
diagram depicting the input and output signal flow, and comparing the
signal flow to the equipment installed in the airplane.

3. Models

The windshear models installed in the simulator software used for
the qualification evaluation must do the following:
a. Provide cues necessary for recognizing windshear onset and
potential performance degradation requiring a pilot to initiate recovery
procedures. The cues must include all of the following, as appropriate
for the portion of the flight envelope:
(1) Rapid airspeed change of at least <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>15 knots
(kts).
(2) Stagnation of airspeed during the takeoff roll.
(3) Rapid vertical speed change of at least <plus- minus<ls-thn-eq="">500 feet per minute (fpm).
(4) Rapid pitch change of at least <plus-minus<ls-thn-eq>5[deg].
b. Be adjustable in intensity (or other parameter to achieve an
intensity effect) to at

[[Page 157]]

least two (2) levels so that upon encountering the windshear the pilot
may identify its presence and apply the recommended procedures for
escape from such a windshear.
(1) If the intensity is lesser, the performance capability of the
simulated airplane in the windshear permits the pilot to maintain a
satisfactory flightpath; and
(2) If the intensity is greater, the performance capability of the
simulated airplane in the windshear does not permit the pilot to
maintain a satisfactory flightpath (crash). Note: The means used to
accomplish the ``nonsurvivable'' scenario of paragraph 3.b.(2) of this
attachment, that involve operational elements of the simulated airplane,
must reflect the dispatch limitations of the airplane.
c. Be available for use in the FAA-approved windshear flight
training program.

4. Demonstrations

a. The sponsor must identify one survivable takeoff windshear
training model and one survivable approach windshear training model. The
wind components of the survivable models must be presented in graphical
format so that all components of the windshear are shown, including
initiation point, variance in magnitude, and time or distance
correlations. The simulator must be operated at the same gross weight,
airplane configuration, and initial airspeed during the takeoff
demonstration (through calm air and through the first selected
survivable windshear), and at the same gross weight, airplane
configuration, and initial airspeed during the approach demonstration
(through calm air and through the second selected survivable windshear).
b. In each of these four situations, at an ``initiation point''
(i.e., where windshear onset is or should be recognized), the
recommended procedures for windshear recovery are applied and the
results are recorded as specified in paragraph 5 of this attachment.
c. These recordings are made without inserting programmed random
turbulence. Turbulence that results from the windshear model is to be
expected, and no attempt may be made to neutralize turbulence from this
source.
d. The definition of the models and the results of the
demonstrations of all four?(4) cases described in paragraph 4.a of this
attachment, must be made a part of the MQTG.

5. Recording Parameters

a. In each of the four MQTG cases, an electronic recording (time
history) must be made of the following parameters:
(1) Indicated or calibrated airspeed.
(2) Indicated vertical speed.
(3) Pitch attitude.
(4) Indicated or radio altitude.
(5) Angle of attack.
(6) Elevator position.
(7) Engine data (thrust, N1, or throttle position).
(8) Wind magnitudes (simple windshear model assumed).
b. These recordings must be initiated at least 10 seconds prior to
the initiation point, and continued until recovery is complete or ground
contact is made.

6. Equipment Installation and Operation

All windshear warning, caution, or guidance hardware installed in
the simulator must operate as it operates in the airplane. For example,
if a rapidly changing wind speed and/or direction would have caused a
windshear warning in the airplane, the simulator must respond
equivalently without instructor/evaluator intervention.

7. Qualification Test Guide

a. All QTG material must be forwarded to the responsible Flight
Standards office.
b. A simulator windshear evaluation will be scheduled in accordance
with normal procedures. Continuing qualification evaluation schedules
will be used to the maximum extent possible.
c. During the on-site evaluation, the evaluator will ask the
operator to run the performance tests and record the results. The
results of these on-site tests will be compared to those results
previously approved and placed in the QTG or MQTG, as appropriate.
d. QTGs for new (or MQTGs for upgraded) simulators must contain or
reference the information described in paragraphs 2, 3, 4, and 5 of this
attachment.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

8. Subjective Evaluation

The responsible Flight Standards office will fly the simulator in at
least two of the available windshear scenarios to subjectively evaluate
simulator performance as it encounters the programmed windshear
conditions.
a. One scenario will include parameters that enable the pilot to
maintain a satisfactory flightpath.
b. One scenario will include parameters that will not enable the
pilot to maintain a satisfactory flightpath (crash).
c. Other scenarios may be examined at the responsible Flight
Standards office's discretion.

[[Page 158]]

9. Qualification Basis

The addition of windshear programming to a simulator in order to
comply with the qualification for required windshear training does not
change the original qualification basis of the simulator.

10. Demonstration Repeatability

For the purposes of demonstration repeatability, it is recommended
that the simulator be flown by means of the simulator's autodrive
function (for those simulators that have autodrive capability) during
the demonstrations.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

Attachment 6 to Appendix A to Part 60--FSTD Directives Applicable to
Airplane Flight Simulators

Flight Simulation Training Device (FSTD) Directive

FSTD Directive 1. Applicable to all Full Flight Simulators (FFS),
regardless of the original qualification basis and qualification date
(original or upgrade), having Class II or Class III airport models
available.
Agency: Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.
Action: This is a retroactive requirement to have all Class II or
Class III airport models meet current requirements.
________________________________________________________________________
Summary: Notwithstanding the authorization listed in paragraph 13b
in Appendices A and C of this part, this FSTD Directive requires each
certificate holder to ensure that by May 30, 2009, except for the
airport model(s) used to qualify the simulator at the designated level,
each airport model used by the certificate holder's instructors or
evaluators for training, checking, or testing under this chapter in an
FFS, meets the definition of a Class II or Class III airport model as
defined in 14CFR part 60. The completion of this requirement will not
require a report, and the method used for keeping instructors and
evaluators apprised of the airport models that meet Class II or Class
III requirements on any given simulator is at the option of the
certificate holder whose employees are using the FFS, but the method
used must be available for review by the TPAA for that certificate
holder.
Dates: FSTD Directive 1 becomes effective on May 30, 2008.

Specific Requirements:

1. Part 60 requires that each FSTD be:
a. Sponsored by a person holding or applying for an FAA operating
certificate under Part 119, Part 141, or Part 142, or holding or
applying for an FAA-approved training program under Part 63, Appendix C,
for flight engineers, and
b. Evaluated and issued an SOQ for a specific FSTD level.
2. FFSs also require the installation of a visual system that is
capable of providing an out-of-the-flight-deck view of airport models.
However, historically these airport models were not routinely evaluated
or required to meet any standardized criteria. This has led to qualified
simulators containing airport models being used to meet FAA-approved
training, testing, or checking requirements with potentially incorrect
or inappropriate visual references.
3. To prevent this from occurring in the future, by May 30, 2009,
except for the airport model(s) used to qualify the simulator at the
designated level, each certificate holder must assure that each airport
model used for training, testing, or checking under this chapter in a
qualified FFS meets the definition of a Class II or Class III airport
model as defined in Appendix F of this part.
4. These references describe the requirements for visual scene
management and the minimum distances from which runway or landing area
features must be visible for all levels of simulator. The airport model
must provide, for each ``in-use runway'' or ``in-use landing area,''
runway or landing area surface and markings, runway or landing area
lighting, taxiway surface and markings, and taxiway lighting. Additional
requirements include correlation of the v airport models with other
aspects of the airport environment, correlation of the aircraft and
associated equipment, scene quality assessment features, and the control
of these models the instructor must be able to exercise.
5. For circling approaches, all requirements of this section apply
to the runway used for the initial approach and to the runway of
intended landing.
6. The details in these models must be developed using airport
pictures, construction drawings and maps, or other similar data, or
developed in accordance with published regulatory material. However,
this FSTD DIRECTIVE 1 does not require that airport models contain
details that are beyond the initially designed capability of the visual
system, as currently qualified. The recognized limitations to visual
systems are as follows:
a. Visual systems not required to have runway numbers as a part of
the specific runway marking requirements are:
(1) Link NVS and DNVS.
(2) Novoview 2500 and 6000.
(3) FlightSafety VITAL series up to, and including, VITAL III, but
not beyond.
(4) Redifusion SP1, SP1T, and SP2.
b. Visual systems required to display runway numbers only for LOFT
scenes are:
(1) FlightSafety VITAL IV.
(2) Redifusion SP3 and SP3T.
(3) Link-Miles Image II.

[[Page 159]]

c. Visual systems not required to have accurate taxiway edge
lighting are:
(1) Redifusion SP1.
(2) FlightSafety Vital IV.
(3) Link-Miles Image II and Image IIT
(4) XKD displays (even though the XKD image generator is capable of
generating blue colored lights, the display cannot accommodate that
color).
7. A copy of this Directive must be filed in the MQTG in the
designated FSTD Directive Section, and its inclusion must be annotated
on the Index of Effective FSTD Directives chart. See Attachment 4,
Appendices A through D for a sample MQTG Index of Effective FSTD
Directives chart.

Flight Simulation Training Device (FSTD) Directive

FSTD Directive 2. Applicable to all airplane Full Flight Simulators
(FFS), regardless of the original qualification basis and qualification
date (original or upgrade), used to conduct full stall training, upset
recovery training, airborne icing training, and other flight training
tasks as described in this Directive.
Agency: Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.
Action: This is a retroactive requirement for any FSTD being used to
obtain training, testing, or checking credit in an FAA approved flight
training program for the specific training maneuvers as defined in this
Directive.
Summary: Notwithstanding the authorization listed in paragraph 13b
in Appendix A of this Part, this FSTD Directive requires that each FSTD
sponsor conduct additional subjective and objective testing, conduct
required modifications, and apply for additional FSTD qualification
under Sec.  60.16 to support continued qualification of the following
flight training tasks where training, testing, or checking credit is
being sought in a selected FSTD being used in an FAA approved flight
training program:

a. Recognition of and Recovery from a Full Stall
b. Upset Prevention and Recovery
c. Engine and Airframe Icing
d. Takeoff and Landing with Gusting Crosswinds
e. Recovery from a Bounced Landing

The FSTD sponsor may elect to apply for additional qualification for
any, all, or none of the above defined training tasks for a particular
FSTD. After March 12, 2019, any FSTD used to conduct the above training
tasks must be evaluated and issued additional qualification by the
responsible Flight Standards office as defined in this Directive.
Dates: FSTD Directive No. 2 becomes effective on May 31, 2016.

Specific Requirements

1. Part 60 requires that each FSTD be:

a. Sponsored by a person holding or applying for an FAA operating
certificate under Part 119, Part 141, or Part 142, or holding or
applying for an FAA-approved training program under Part 63, Appendix C,
for flight engineers, and
b. Evaluated and issued a Statement of Qualification (SOQ) for a
specific FSTD level.
2. The evaluation criteria contained in this Directive is intended
to address specific training tasks that require additional evaluation to
ensure adequate FSTD fidelity.
3. The requirements described in this Directive define additional
qualification criteria for specific training tasks that are applicable
only to those FSTDs that will be utilized to obtain training, testing,
or checking credit in an FAA approved flight training program. In order
to obtain additional qualification for the tasks described in this
Directive, FSTD sponsors must request additional qualification in
accordance with Sec.  60.16 and the requirements of this Directive.
FSTDs that are found to meet the requirements of this Directive will
have their Statement of Qualification (SOQ) amended to reflect the
additional training tasks that the FSTD has been qualified to conduct.
The additional qualification requirements as defined in this Directive
are divided into the following training tasks:

a. Section I--Additional Qualification Requirements for Full Stall
Training Tasks
b. Section II--Additional Qualification Requirements for Upset
Prevention and Recovery Training Tasks
c. Section III--Additional Qualification Requirements for Engine and
Airframe Icing Training Tasks
d. Section IV--Additional Qualification Requirements for Takeoff and
Landing in Gusting Crosswinds
e. Section V--Additional Qualification Requirements for Bounced Landing
Recovery Training Tasks

4. A copy of this Directive (along with all required Statements of
Compliance and objective test results) must be filed in the MQTG in the
designated FSTD Directive Section, and its inclusion must be annotated
on the Index of Effective FSTD Directives chart. See Attachment 4,
Appendix A for a sample MQTG Index of Effective FSTD Directives chart.

Section I--Evaluation Requirements for Full Stall Training Tasks

1. This section applies to previously qualified Level C and Level D
FSTDs being used to obtain credit for stall training maneuvers beyond
the first indication of a stall (such as

[[Page 160]]

stall warning system activation, stick shaker, etc.) in an FAA approved
training program.
2. The evaluation requirements in this Directive are intended to
validate FSTD fidelity at angles of attack sufficient to identify the
stall, to demonstrate aircraft performance degradation in the stall, and
to demonstrate recovery techniques from a fully stalled flight
condition.
3. After March 12, 2019, any FSTD being used to obtain credit for
full stall training maneuvers in an FAA approved training program must
be evaluated and issued additional qualification in accordance with this
Directive and the following sections of Appendix A of this Part:

a. Table A1A, General Requirements, Section 2.m. (High Angle of Attack
Modeling)
b. Table A1A, General Requirements, Section 3.f. (Stick Pusher System)
[where applicable]
c. Table A2A, Objective Testing Requirements, Test 2.a.10 (Stick Pusher
Force Calibration) [where applicable]
d. Table A2A, Objective Testing Requirements, Test 2.c.8.a (Stall
Characteristics)
e. Table A2A, Objective Testing Requirements, Test 3.f.5 (Characteristic
Motion Vibrations--Stall Buffet) [See paragraph 4 of this section for
applicability on previously qualified FSTDs]
f. Table A3A, Functions and Subjective Testing Requirements, Test
5.b.1.b. (High Angle of Attack Maneuvers)
g. Attachment 7, Additional Simulator Qualification Requirements for
Stall, Upset Prevention and Recovery, and Engine and Airframe Icing
Training Tasks (High Angle of Attack Model Evaluation)

4. For FSTDs initially qualified before May 31, 2016, including
FSTDs that are initially qualified under the grace period conditions as
defined in Sec.  60.15(c):

a. Objective testing for stall characteristics (Table A2A, test
2.c.8.a.) will only be required for the (wings level) second segment
climb and approach or landing flight conditions. In lieu of objective
testing for the high altitude cruise and turning flight stall
conditions, these maneuvers may be subjectively evaluated by a qualified
subject matter expert (SME) pilot and addressed in the required
statement of compliance.
b. Where existing flight test validation data in the FSTD's Master
Qualification Test Guide (MQTG) is missing required parameters or is
otherwise unsuitable to fully meet the objective testing requirements of
this Directive, the FAA may accept alternate sources of validation,
including subjective validation by an SME pilot with direct experience
in the stall characteristics of the aircraft.
c. Objective testing for characteristic motion vibrations (Stall
buffet--Table A2A, test 3.f.5) is not required where the FSTD's stall
buffets have been subjectively evaluated by an SME pilot. For previously
qualified Level D FSTDs that currently have objective stall buffet tests
in their approved MQTG, the results of these existing tests must be
provided to the FAA with the updated stall and stall buffet models in
place.
d. As described in Attachment 7 of this Appendix, the FAA may accept a
statement of compliance from the data provider which confirms the stall
characteristics have been subjectively evaluated by an SME pilot on an
engineering simulator or development simulator that is acceptable to the
FAA. Where this evaluation takes place on an engineering or development
simulator, additional objective ``proof-of-match'' testing for all
flight conditions as described in tests 2.c.8.a. and 3.f.5.will be
required to verify the implementation of the stall model and stall
buffets on the training FSTD.

5. Where qualification is being sought to conduct full stall
training tasks in accordance with this Directive, the FSTD Sponsor must
conduct the required evaluations and modifications as prescribed in this
Directive and report compliance to the responsible Flight Standards
office in accordance with Sec.  60.23 using the standardized FSTD
Sponsor Notification Form. At a minimum, this form must be accompanied
with the following information:

a. A description of any modifications to the FSTD (in accordance with
Sec.  60.23) necessary to meet the requirements of this Directive.
b. Statements of Compliance (High Angle of Attack Modeling/Stick Pusher
System)--See Table A1A, Section 2.m., 3.f., and Attachment 7
c. Statement of Compliance (SME Pilot Evaluation)--See Table A1A,
Section 2.m. and Attachment 7
d. Copies of the required objective test results as described above in
sections 3.c., 3.d., and 3.e.

6. The responsible Flight Standards office will review each
submission to determine if the requirements of this Directive have been
met and respond to the FSTD Sponsor as described in Sec.  60.23(c).
Additional responsible Flight Standards office conducted FSTD
evaluations may be required before the modified FSTD is placed into
service. This response, along with any noted restrictions, will serve as
interim qualification for full stall training tasks until such time that
a permanent change is made to the Statement of Qualification (SOQ) at
the FSTD's next scheduled evaluation.

[[Page 161]]

Section II--Evaluation Requirements for Upset Prevention and Recovery
Training Tasks

1. This section applies to previously qualified FSTDs being used to
obtain training, testing, or checking credits for upset prevention and
recovery training tasks (UPRT) as defined in Appendix A, Table A1A,
Section 2.n. of this part. Additionally, FSTDs being used for unusual
attitude training maneuvers that are intended to exceed the parameters
of an aircraft upset must also be evaluated and qualified for UPRT under
this section. These parameters include pitch attitudes greater than 25
degrees nose up; pitch attitudes greater than 10 degrees nose down, and
bank angles greater than 45 degrees.
2. The requirements contained in this section are intended to define
minimum standards for evaluating an FSTD for use in upset prevention and
recovery training maneuvers that may exceed an aircraft's normal flight
envelope. These standards include the evaluation of qualified training
maneuvers against the FSTD's validation envelope and providing the
instructor with minimum feedback tools for the purpose of determining if
a training maneuver is conducted within FSTD validation limits and the
aircraft's operating limits.
3. This Directive contains additional subjective testing that
exceeds the evaluation requirements of previously qualified FSTDs. Where
aerodynamic modeling data or validation data is not available or
insufficient to meet the requirements of this Directive, the responsible
Flight Standards office may limit additional qualification to certain
upset prevention and recovery maneuvers where adequate data exists.
4. After March 12, 2019, any FSTD being used to obtain training,
testing, or checking credit for upset prevention and recovery training
tasks in an FAA approved flight training program must be evaluated and
issued additional qualification in accordance with this Directive and
the following sections of Appendix A of this part:

a. Table A1A, General Requirements, Section 2.n. (Upset Prevention and
Recovery)
b. Table A3A, Functions and Subjective Testing, Test 5.b.3. (Upset
Prevention and Recovery Maneuvers)
c. Attachment 7, Additional Simulator Qualification Requirements for
Stall, Upset Prevention and Recovery, and Engine and Airframe Icing
Training Tasks (Upset Prevention and Recovery Training Maneuver
Evaluation)
5. Where qualification is being sought to conduct upset prevention
and recovery training tasks in accordance with this Directive, the FSTD
Sponsor must conduct the required evaluations and modifications as
prescribed in this Directive and report compliance to the responsible
Flight Standards office in accordance with Sec.  60.23 using the
standardized FSTD Sponsor Notification Form. At a minimum, this form
must be accompanied with the following information:

a. A description of any modifications to the FSTD (in accordance with
Sec.  60.23) necessary to meet the requirements of this Directive.
b. Statement of Compliance (FSTD Validation Envelope)--See Table A1A,
Section 2.n. and Attachment 7
c. A confirmation statement that the modified FSTD has been subjectively
evaluated by a qualified pilot as described in Sec.  60.16(a)(1)(iii).

6. The responsible Flight Standards office will review each
submission to determine if the requirements of this Directive have been
met and respond to the FSTD Sponsor as described in Sec.  60.23(c).
Additional responsible Flight Standards office conducted FSTD
evaluations may be required before the modified FSTD is placed into
service. This response, along with any noted restrictions, will serve as
an interim qualification for upset prevention and recovery training
tasks until such time that a permanent change is made to the Statement
of Qualification (SOQ) at the FSTD's next scheduled evaluation.

Section III--Evaluation Requirements for Engine and Airframe Icing
Training Tasks

1. This section applies to previously qualified Level C and Level D
FSTDs being used to obtain training, testing, or checking credits in
maneuvers that demonstrate the effects of engine and airframe ice
accretion.
2. The requirements in this section are intended to supersede and
improve upon existing Level C and Level D FSTD evaluation requirements
on the effects of engine and airframe icing. The requirements define a
minimum level of fidelity required to adequately simulate the aircraft
specific aerodynamic characteristics of an in-flight encounter with
engine and airframe ice accretion as necessary to accomplish training
objectives.
3. This Directive contains additional subjective testing that
exceeds the evaluation requirements of previously qualified FSTDs. Where
aerodynamic modeling data is not available or insufficient to meet the
requirements of this Directive, the responsible Flight Standards office
may limit qualified engine and airframe icing maneuvers where sufficient
aerodynamic modeling data exists.
4. After March 12, 2019, any FSTD being used to conduct training
tasks that demonstrate the effects of engine and airframe icing must be
evaluated and issued additional qualification in accordance with this
Directive and the following sections of Appendix A of this part:

a. Table A1A, General Requirements, Section 2.j. (Engine and Airframe
Icing)

[[Page 162]]

b. Attachment 7, Additional Simulator Qualification Requirements for
Stall, Upset Prevention and Recovery, and Engine and Airframe Icing
Training Tasks (Engine and Airframe Icing Evaluation; Paragraphs 1, 2,
and 3). Objective demonstration tests of engine and airframe icing
effects (Attachment 2, Table A2A, test 2.i. of this Appendix) are not
required for previously qualified FSTDs.

5. Where continued qualification is being sought to conduct engine
and airframe icing training tasks in accordance with this Directive, the
FSTD Sponsor must conduct the required evaluations and modifications as
prescribed in this Directive and report compliance to the responsible
Flight Standards office in accordance with Sec.  60.23 using the
standardized FSTD Sponsor Notification Form. At a minimum, this form
must be accompanied with the following information:

a. A description of any modifications to the FSTD (in accordance with
Sec.  60.23) necessary to meet the requirements of this Directive;
b. Statement of Compliance (Ice Accretion Model)--See Table A1A, Section
2.j., and Attachment 7; and
c. A confirmation statement that the modified FSTD has been subjectively
evaluated by a qualified pilot as described in Sec.  60.16(a)(1)(iii).

6. The responsible Flight Standards office will review each
submission to determine if the requirements of this Directive have been
met and respond to the FSTD Sponsor as described in Sec.  60.23(c).
Additional responsible Flight Standards office conducted FSTD
evaluations may be required before the modified FSTD is placed into
service. This response, along with any noted restrictions, will serve as
an interim update to the FSTD's Statement of Qualification (SOQ) until
such time that a permanent change is made to the SOQ at the FSTD's next
scheduled evaluation.

Section IV--Evaluation Requirements for Takeoff and Landing in Gusting
Crosswind

1. This section applies to previously qualified FSTDs that will be
used to obtain training, testing, or checking credits in takeoff and
landing tasks in gusting crosswinds as part of an FAA approved training
program. The requirements of this Directive are applicable only to those
Level B and higher FSTDs that are qualified to conduct takeoff and
landing training tasks.
2. The requirements in this section introduce new minimum simulator
requirements for gusting crosswinds during takeoff and landing training
tasks as well as additional subjective testing that exceeds the
evaluation requirements of previously qualified FSTDs.
3. After March 12, 2019, any FSTD that is used to conduct gusting
crosswind takeoff and landing training tasks must be evaluated and
issued additional qualification in accordance with this Directive and
the following sections of Appendix A of this part:

a. Table A1A, General Requirements, Section 2.d.3. (Ground Handling
Characteristics);
b. Table A3A, Functions and Subjective Testing Requirements, test 3.a.3
(Takeoff, Crosswind--Maximum Demonstrated and Gusting Crosswind); and
c. Table A3A, Functions and Subjective Testing Requirements, test 8.d.
(Approach and landing with crosswind--Maximum Demonstrated and Gusting
Crosswind).

4. Where qualification is being sought to conduct gusting crosswind
training tasks in accordance with this Directive, the FSTD Sponsor must
conduct the required evaluations and modifications as prescribed in this
Directive and report compliance to the responsible Flight Standards
office in accordance with Sec.  60.23 using the standardized FSTD
Sponsor Notification Form. At a minimum, this form must be accompanied
with the following information:

a. A description of any modifications to the FSTD (in accordance with
Sec.  60.23) necessary to meet the requirements of this Directive.
b. Statement of Compliance (Gusting Crosswind Profiles)--See Table A1A,
Section 2.d.3.
c. A confirmation statement that the modified FSTD has been subjectively
evaluated by a qualified pilot as described in Sec.  60.16(a)(1)(iii).

5. The responsible Flight Standards office will review each
submission to determine if the requirements of this Directive have been
met and respond to the FSTD Sponsor as described in Sec.  60.23(c).
Additional responsible Flight Standards office conducted FSTD
evaluations may be required before the modified FSTD is placed into
service. This response, along with any noted restrictions, will serve as
an interim qualification for gusting crosswind training tasks until such
time that a permanent change is made to the Statement of Qualification
(SOQ) at the FSTD's next scheduled evaluation.

Section V--Evaluation Requirements for Bounced Landing Recovery Training
Tasks

1. This section applies to previously qualified FSTDs that will be
used to obtain training, testing, or checking credits in bounced landing
recovery as part of an FAA approved training program. The requirements
of this Directive are applicable only to those Level B and higher FSTDs
that are qualified to conduct takeoff and landing training tasks.
2. The evaluation requirements in this section are intended to
introduce new evaluation requirements for bounced landing recovery
training tasks and contains additional

[[Page 163]]

subjective testing that exceeds the evaluation requirements of
previously qualified FSTDs.
3. After March 12, 2019, any FSTD that is used to conduct bounced
landing training tasks must be evaluated and issued additional
qualification in accordance with this Directive and the following
sections of Appendix A of this Part:

a. Table A1A, General Requirements, Section 2.d.2. (Ground Reaction
Characteristics)
b. Table A3A, Functions and Subjective Testing Requirements, test 9.e.
(Missed Approach--Bounced Landing)

4. Where qualification is being sought to conduct bounced landing
training tasks in accordance with this Directive, the FSTD Sponsor must
conduct the required evaluations and modifications as prescribed in this
Directive and report compliance to the responsible Flight Standards
office in accordance with Sec.  60.23 using the standardized FSTD
Sponsor Notification Form. At a minimum, this form must be accompanied
with the following information:

a. A description of any modifications to the FSTD (in accordance with
Sec.  60.23) necessary to meet the requirements of this Directive; and
b. A confirmation statement that the modified FSTD has been subjectively
evaluated by a qualified pilot as described in Sec.  60.16(a)(1)(iii).

5. The responsible Flight Standards office will review each
submission to determine if the requirements of this Directive have been
met and respond to the FSTD Sponsor as described in Sec.  60.23(c).
Additional responsible Flight Standards office conducted FSTD
evaluations may be required before the modified FSTD is placed into
service. This response, along with any noted restrictions, will serve as
an interim qualification for bounced landing recovery training tasks
until such time that a permanent change is made to the Statement of
Qualification (SOQ) at the FSTD's next scheduled evaluation.

Attachment 7 to Appendix A to Part 60--Additional Simulator
Qualification Requirements for Stall, Upset Prevention and Recovery, and
Engine and Airframe Icing Training Tasks

Begin QPS Requirements

A. High Angle of Attack Model Evaluation (Table A1A, Section 2.m.)

1. Applicability: This attachment applies to all simulators that are
used to satisfy training requirements for stall maneuvers that are
conducted at angles of attack beyond the activation of the stall warning
system. This attachment is not applicable for those FSTDs that are only
qualified for approach to stall maneuvers where recovery is initiated at
the first indication of the stall. The material in this section is
intended to supplement the general requirements, objective testing
requirements, and subjective testing requirements contained within
Tables A1A, A2A, and A3A, respectively.
2. General Requirements: The requirements for high angle of attack
modeling are intended to evaluate the recognition cues and performance
and handling qualities of a developing stall through the stall
identification angle-of-attack and recovery. Strict time-history-based
evaluations against flight test data may not adequately validate the
aerodynamic model in an unsteady and potentially unstable flight regime,
such as stalled flight. As a result, the objective testing requirements
defined in Table A2A do not prescribe strict tolerances on any parameter
at angles of attack beyond the stall identification angle of attack. In
lieu of mandating such objective tolerances, a Statement of Compliance
(SOC) will be required to define the source data and methods used to
develop the stall aerodynamic model.
3. Fidelity Requirements: The requirements defined for the
evaluation of full stall training maneuvers are intended to provide the
following levels of fidelity:

a. Airplane type specific recognition cues of the first indication of
the stall (such as the stall warning system or aerodynamic stall
buffet);
b. Airplane type specific recognition cues of an impending aerodynamic
stall; and
c. Recognition cues and handling qualities from the stall break through
recovery that are sufficiently exemplar of the airplane being simulated
to allow successful completion of the stall recovery training tasks.

For the purposes of stall maneuver evaluation, the term ``exemplar'' is
defined as a level of fidelity that is type specific of the simulated
airplane to the extent that the training objectives can be
satisfactorily accomplished.
4. Statement of Compliance (Aerodynamic Model): At a minimum, the
following must be addressed in the SOC:
a. Source Data and Modeling Methods: The SOC must identify the sources
of data used to develop the aerodynamic model. These data sources may be
from the airplane original equipment manufacturer (OEM), the original
FSTD manufacturer/data provider, or other data provider acceptable to
the FAA. Of particular interest is a mapping of test points in the form
of alpha/beta envelope plot for a minimum of flaps up and flaps down
aircraft configurations. For the flight test data, a list of the types
of maneuvers used to define the aerodynamic model for angle of attack
ranges greater than the first indication of stall must be provided per
flap setting. In cases

[[Page 164]]

where it is impractical to develop and validate a stall model with
flight-test data (e.g., due to safety concerns involving the collection
of flight test data past a certain angle of attack), the data provider
is expected to make a reasonable attempt to develop a stall model
through the required angle of attack range using analytical methods and
empirical data (e.g., wind-tunnel data);
b. Validity Range: The FSTD sponsor must declare the range of angle of
attack and sideslip where the aerodynamic model remains valid for
training. For stall recovery training tasks, satisfactory aerodynamic
model fidelity must be shown through at least 10 degrees beyond the
stall identification angle of attack. For the purposes of determining
this validity range, the stall identification angle of attack is defined
as the angle of attack where the pilot is given a clear and distinctive
indication to cease any further increase in angle of attack where one or
more of the following characteristics occur:

i. No further increase in pitch occurs when the pitch control is held at
the full aft stop for 2 seconds, leading to an inability to arrest
descent rate;
ii. An uncommanded nose down pitch that cannot be readily arrested,
which may be accompanied by an uncommanded rolling motion;
iii. Buffeting of a magnitude and severity that is a strong and
effective deterrent to further increase in angle of attack; and
iv. Activation of a stick pusher.

The model validity range must also be capable of simulating the airplane
dynamics as a result of a pilot initially resisting the stick pusher in
training. For aircraft equipped with a stall envelope protection system,
the model validity range must extend to 10 degrees of angle of attack
beyond the stall identification angle of attack with the protection
systems disabled or otherwise degraded (such as a degraded flight
control mode as a result of a pitot/static system failure).
c. Model Characteristics: Within the declared range of model validity,
the SOC must address, and the aerodynamic model must incorporate, the
following stall characteristics where applicable by aircraft type:

i. Degradation in static/dynamic lateral-directional stability;
ii. Degradation in control response (pitch, roll, yaw);
iii. Uncommanded roll acceleration or roll-off requiring significant
control deflection to counter;
iv. Apparent randomness or non-repeatability;
v. Changes in pitch stability;
vi. Stall hysteresis;
vii. Mach effects;
viii. Stall buffet; and
ix. Angle of attack rate effects.

An overview of the methodology used to address these features must be
provided.

5. Statement of Compliance (Subject Matter Expert Pilot Evaluation):
The sponsor must provide an SOC that confirms the FSTD has been
subjectively evaluated by a subject matter expert (SME) pilot who is
knowledgeable of the aircraft's stall characteristics. In order to
qualify as an acceptable SME to evaluate the FSTD's stall
characteristics, the SME must meet the following requirements:

a. Has held a type rating/qualification in the aircraft being simulated;
b. Has direct experience in conducting stall maneuvers in an aircraft
that shares the same type rating as the make, model, and series of the
simulated aircraft. This stall experience must include hands on
manipulation of the controls at angles of attack sufficient to identify
the stall (e.g., deterrent buffet, stick pusher activation, etc.)
through recovery to stable flight;
c. Where the SME's stall experience is on an airplane of a different
make, model, and series within the same type rating, differences in
aircraft specific stall recognition cues and handling characteristics
must be addressed using available documentation. This documentation may
include aircraft operating manuals, aircraft manufacturer flight test
reports, or other documentation that describes the stall characteristics
of the aircraft; and
d. Must be familiar with the intended stall training maneuvers to be
conducted in the FSTD (e.g., general aircraft configurations, stall
entry methods, etc.) and the cues necessary to accomplish the required
training objectives. The purpose of this requirement is to ensure that
the stall model has been sufficiently evaluated in those general
aircraft configurations and stall entry methods that will likely be
conducted in training.

This SOC will only be required once at the time the FSTD is initially
qualified for stall training tasks as long as the FSTD's stall model
remains unmodified from what was originally evaluated and qualified.
Where an FSTD shares common aerodynamic and flight control models with
that of an engineering simulator or development simulator that is
acceptable to the FAA, the FAA will accept an SOC from the data provider
that confirms the stall characteristics have been subjectively assessed
by an SME pilot on the engineering or development simulator.
An FSTD sponsor may submit a request to the Administrator for
approval of a deviation from the SME pilot experience requirements in
this paragraph. This request for deviation must include the following
information:


[[Page 165]]


a. An assessment of pilot availability that demonstrates that a suitably
qualified pilot meeting the experience requirements of this section
cannot be practically located; and
b. Alternative methods to subjectively evaluate the FSTD's capability to
provide the stall recognition cues and handling characteristics needed
to accomplish the training objectives.

B. Upset Prevention and Recovery Training (UPRT) Maneuver Evaluation
(Table A1A, Section 2.n.)

1. Applicability: This attachment applies to all simulators that are
used to satisfy training requirements for upset prevention and recovery
training (UPRT) maneuvers. For the purposes of this attachment (as
defined in the Airplane Upset Recovery Training Aid), an aircraft upset
is generally defined as an airplane unintentionally exceeding the
following parameters normally experienced in line operations or
training:

a. Pitch attitude greater than 25 degrees nose up;
b. Pitch attitude greater than 10 degrees nose down;
c. Bank angles greater than 45 degrees; and
d. Within the above parameters, but flying at airspeeds inappropriate
for the conditions.

FSTDs that will be used to conduct training maneuvers where the FSTD is
either repositioned into an aircraft upset condition or an artificial
stimulus (such as weather phenomena or system failures) is applied that
is intended to result in a flightcrew entering an aircraft upset
condition must be evaluated and qualified in accordance with this
section.
2. General Requirements: The general requirement for UPRT
qualification in Table A1A defines three basic elements required for
qualifying an FSTD for UPRT maneuvers:

a. FSTD Training Envelope: Valid UPRT should be conducted within the
high and moderate confidence regions of the FSTD validation envelope as
defined in paragraph 3 below.
b. Instructor Feedback: Provides the instructor/evaluator with a minimum
set of feedback tools to properly evaluate the trainee's performance in
accomplishing an upset recovery training task.
c. Upset Scenarios: Where dynamic upset scenarios or aircraft system
malfunctions are used to stimulate the FSTD into an aircraft upset
condition, specific guidance must be available to the instructor on the
IOS that describes how the upset scenario is driven along with any
malfunction or degradation in FSTD functionality that is required to
stimulate the upset.

3. FSTD Validation Envelope: For the purposes of this attachment,
the term ``flight envelope'' refers to the entire domain in which the
FSTD is capable of being flown with a degree of confidence that the FSTD
responds similarly to the airplane. This envelope can be further divided
into three subdivisions (see Appendix 3-D of the Airplane Upset Recovery
Training Aid):
a. Flight test validated region: This is the region of the flight
envelope which has been validated with flight test data, typically by
comparing the performance of the FSTD against the flight test data
through tests incorporated in the QTG and other flight test data
utilized to further extend the model beyond the minimum requirements.
Within this region, there is high confidence that the simulator responds
similarly to the aircraft. Note that this region is not strictly limited
to what has been tested in the QTG; as long as the aerodynamics
mathematical model has been conformed to the flight test results, that
portion of the mathematical model can be considered to be within the
flight test validated region.
b. Wind tunnel and/or analytical region: This is the region of the
flight envelope for which the FSTD has not been compared to flight test
data, but for which there has been wind tunnel testing or the use of
other reliable predictive methods (typically by the aircraft
manufacturer) to define the aerodynamic model. Any extensions to the
aerodynamic model that have been evaluated in accordance with the
definition of an exemplar stall model (as described in the stall
maneuver evaluation section) must be clearly indicated. Within this
region, there is moderate confidence that the simulator will respond
similarly to the aircraft.
c. Extrapolated: This is the region extrapolated beyond the flight test
validated and wind tunnel/analytical regions. The extrapolation may be a
linear extrapolation, a holding of the last value before the
extrapolation began, or some other set of values. Whether this
extrapolated data is provided by the aircraft or simulator manufacturer,
it is a ``best guess'' only. Within this region, there is low confidence
that the simulator will respond similarly to the aircraft. Brief
excursions into this region may still retain a moderate confidence level
in FSTD fidelity; however, the instructor should be aware that the
FSTD's response may deviate from the actual aircraft.

4. Instructor Feedback Mechanism: For the instructor/evaluator to
provide feedback to the student during UPRT maneuver training,
additional information must be accessible that indicates the fidelity of
the simulation, the magnitude of trainee's flight control inputs, and
aircraft operational limits that could potentially affect the successful
completion of the maneuver(s). At a minimum,

[[Page 166]]

the following must be available to the instructor/evaluator:
a. FSTD Validation Envelope: The FSTD must employ a method to display
the FSTD's expected fidelity with respect to the FSTD validation
envelope. This may be displayed as an angle of attack vs sideslip
(alpha/beta) envelope cross-plot on the Instructor Operating System
(IOS) or other alternate method to clearly convey the FSTD's fidelity
level during the maneuver. The cross-plot or other alternative method
must display the relevant validity regions for flaps up and flaps down
at a minimum. This validation envelope must be derived by the
aerodynamic data provider or derived using information and data sources
provided by the original aerodynamic data provider.
b. Flight Control Inputs: The FSTD must employ a method for the
instructor/evaluator to assess the trainee's flight control inputs
during the upset recovery maneuver. Additional parameters, such as
cockpit control forces (forces applied by the pilot to the controls) and
the flight control law mode for fly-by-wire aircraft, must be portrayed
in this feedback mechanism as well. For passive sidesticks, whose
displacement is the flight control input, the force applied by the pilot
to the controls does not need to be displayed. This tool must include a
time history or other equivalent method of recording flight control
positions.
c. Aircraft Operational Limits: The FSTD must employ a method to provide
the instructor/evaluator with real-time information concerning the
aircraft operating limits. The simulated aircraft's parameters must be
displayed dynamically in real-time and also provided in a time history
or equivalent format. At a minimum, the following parameters must be
available to the instructor:
i. Airspeed and airspeed limits, including the stall speed and maximum
operating limit airspeed (Vmo/Mmo);
ii. Load factor and operational load factor limits; and
iii. Angle of attack and the stall identification angle of attack. See
section A, paragraph 4.b. of this attachment for additional information
concerning the definition of the stall identification angle of attack.
This parameter may be displayed in conjunction with the FSTD validation
envelope.

End QPS Requirements

Begin Information

An example FSTD ``alpha/beta'' envelope display and IOS feedback
mechanism are shown below in Figure 1 and Figure 2. The following
examples are provided as guidance material on one possible method to
display the required UPRT feedback parameters on an IOS display. FSTD
sponsors may develop other methods and feedback mechanisms that provide
the required parameters and support the training program objectives.

[[Page 167]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30MR16.116


[[Page 168]]



End Information

Begin QPS Requirements

C. Engine and Airframe Icing Evaluation (Table A1A, Section 2.j.)

1. Applicability: This section applies to all FSTDs that are used to
satisfy training requirements for engine and airframe icing. New general
requirements and objective requirements for simulator qualification have
been developed to define aircraft specific icing models that support
training objectives for the recognition and recovery from an in-flight
ice accretion event.
2. General Requirements: The qualification of engine and airframe
icing consists of the following elements that must be considered when
developing ice accretion models for use in training:
a. Ice accretion models must be developed to account for training
the specific skills required for recognition of ice accumulation and
execution of the required response.
b. Ice accretion models must be developed in a manner to contain
aircraft specific recognition cues as determined with aircraft OEM
supplied data or other suitable analytical methods.
c. At least one qualified ice accretion model must be objectively
tested to demonstrate that the model has been implemented correctly and
generates the correct cues as necessary for training.
3. Statement of Compliance: The SOC as described in Table A1A,
Section 2.j. must contain the following information to support FSTD
qualification of aircraft specific ice accretion models:
a. A description of expected aircraft specific recognition cues and
degradation effects due to a typical in-flight icing encounter. Typical
cues may include loss of lift, decrease in stall angle of attack,
changes in pitching moment, decrease in control effectiveness, and
changes in control forces in addition to any overall increase in drag.
This description must be based upon relevant source data, such as
aircraft OEM supplied data, accident/incident data, or other acceptable
data sources. Where a particular airframe has demonstrated
vulnerabilities to a specific type of ice accretion (due to accident/
incident history) which requires specific training (such as supercooled
large-droplet icing or tailplane icing), ice accretion models must be
developed that address the training requirements.
b. A description of the data sources utilized to develop the
qualified ice accretion models. Acceptable data sources may be, but are
not limited to, flight test data, aircraft certification data, aircraft
OEM engineering simulation data, or other analytical methods based upon
established engineering principles.
4. Objective Demonstration Testing: The purpose of the objective
demonstration test is to demonstrate that the ice accretion models as
described in the Statement of Compliance have been implemented correctly
and demonstrate the proper cues and effects as defined in the approved
data sources. At least one ice accretion model must be selected for
testing and included in the Master Qualification Test Guide (MQTG). Two
tests are required to demonstrate engine and airframe icing effects. One
test will demonstrate the FSTDs baseline performance without icing, and
the second test will demonstrate the aerodynamic effects of ice
accretion relative to the baseline test.
a. Recorded Parameters: In each of the two required MQTG cases, a
time history recording must be made of the following parameters:

i. Altitude;
ii. Airspeed;
iii. Normal Acceleration;
iv. Engine Power/settings;
v. Angle of Attack/Pitch attitude;
vi. Bank Angle;
vii. Flight control inputs;
viii. Stall warning and stall buffet onset; and
ix. Other parameters as necessary to demonstrate the effects of ice
accretions.

b. Demonstration maneuver: The FSTD sponsor must select an ice
accretion model as identified in the SOC for testing. The selected
maneuver must demonstrate the effects of ice accretion at high angles of
attack from a trimmed condition through approach to stall and ``full''
stall as compared to a baseline (no ice buildup) test. The ice accretion
models must demonstrate the cues necessary to recognize the onset of ice
accretion on the airframe, lifting surfaces, and engines and provide
representative degradation in performance and handling qualities to the
extent that a recovery can be executed. Typical recognition cues that
may be present depending upon the simulated aircraft include:

i. Decrease in stall angle of attack;
ii. Increase in stall speed;
iii. Increase in stall buffet threshold of perception speed;
iv. Changes in pitching moment;
v. Changes in stall buffet characteristics;
vi. Changes in control effectiveness or control forces; and
vii. Engine effects (power variation, vibration, etc.);

The demonstration test may be conducted by initializing and maintaining
a fixed amount of ice accretion throughout the maneuver in order to
consistently evaluate the aerodynamic effects.

[[Page 169]]

End QPS Requirements

[Doc. No. FAA-2002-12461, 73 FR 26490, May 9, 2008, as amended by Docket
FAA-2014-0391, Amdt. 60-4, 81 FR 18218, 18219, 18240, 18283, 18300, and
18303, Mar. 30, 2016; 81 FR 32016 and 32066, May 20, 2016; Docket FAA-
2018-0119, Amdt. 60-5, 83 FR 9170, Mar. 5, 2018; Amdt. 60-6, 83 FR
30275, June 27, 2018; Docket No. FAA-2022-1355, Amdt. No. 60-7, 87 FR
75711, Dec. 9, 2022]



<r05>
Sec. Appendix B to Part 60--Qualification Performance Standards for
Airplane Flight Training Devices

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

This appendix establishes the standards for Airplane FTD evaluation
and qualification at Level 4, Level 5, Level 6, or Level 7. The Flight
Standards Service, is responsible for the development, application, and
implementation of the standards contained within this appendix. The
procedures and criteria specified in this appendix will be used by the
responsible Flight Standards office when conducting airplane FTD
evaluations.

Table of Contents

1. Introduction
2. Applicability (Sec. Sec.  60.1 and 60.2).
3. Definitions (Sec.  60.3).
4. Qualification Performance Standards (Sec.  60.4).
5. Quality Management System (Sec.  60.5).
6. Sponsor Qualification Requirements (Sec.  60.7).
7. Additional Responsibilities of the Sponsor (Sec.  60.9).
8. FTD Use (Sec.  60.11).
9. FTD Objective Data Requirements (Sec.  60.13).
10. Special Equipment and Personnel Requirements for Qualification of
the FTD (Sec.  60.14).
11. Initial (and Upgrade) Qualification Requirements (Sec.  60.15).
12. Additional Qualifications for Currently Qualified FTDs (Sec.
60.16).
13. Previously Qualified FTDs (Sec.  60.17).
14. Inspection, Continuing Qualification Evaluation, and Maintenance
Requirements (Sec.  60.19).
15. Logging FTD Discrepancies (Sec.  60.20).
16. Interim Qualification of FTDs for New Airplane Types or Models
(Sec.  60.21).
17. Modifications to FTDs (Sec.  60.23).
18. Operations with Missing, Malfunctioning, or Inoperative Components
(Sec.  60.25).
19. Automatic Loss of Qualification and Procedures for Restoration of
Qualification (Sec.  60.27).
20. Other Losses of Qualification and Procedures for Restoration of
Qualification (Sec.  60.29).
21. Record Keeping and Reporting (Sec.  60.31).
22. Applications, Logbooks, Reports, and Records: Fraud, Falsification,
or Incorrect Statements (Sec.  60.33).
23. [Reserved]
24. Levels of FTD.
25. FTD Qualification on the Basis of a Bilateral Aviation Safety
Agreement (BASA) (Sec.  60.37).
Attachment 1 to Appendix B to Part 60--General FTD Requirements.
Attachment 2 to Appendix B to Part 60--Flight Training Device (FTD)
Objective Tests.
Attachment 3 to Appendix B to Part 60--Flight Training Device (FTD)
Subjective Evaluation.
Attachment 4 to Appendix B to Part 60--Sample Documents.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

1. Introduction

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

a. This appendix contains background information as well as
regulatory and informative material as described later in this section.
To assist the reader in determining what areas are required and what
areas are permissive, the text in this appendix is divided into two
sections: ``QPS Requirements'' and ``Information.'' The QPS Requirements
sections contain details regarding compliance with the part 60 rule
language. These details are regulatory, but are found only in this
appendix. The Information sections contain material that is advisory in
nature, and designed to give the user general information about the
regulation.
b. [Reserved]
c. The responsible Flight Standards office encourages the use of
electronic media for all communication, including any record, report,
request, test, or statement required by this appendix. The electronic
media used must have adequate security provisions and be acceptable to
the responsible Flight Standards office.
d. Related Reading References.
(1) 14 CFR part 60.
(2) 14 CFR part 61.
(3) 14 CFR part 63.
(4) 14 CFR part 119.
(5) 14 CFR part 121.
(6) 14 CFR part 125.
(7) 14 CFR part 135.
(8) 14 CFR part 141.
(9) 14 CFR part 142.

[[Page 170]]

(10) AC 120-28, as amended, Criteria for Approval of Category III
Landing Weather Minima.
(11) AC 120-29, as amended, Criteria for Approving Category I and
Category II Landing Minima for part 121 operators.
(12) AC 120-35, as amended, Flightcrew Member Line Operational
Simulations: Line-Oriented Flight Training, Special Purpose Operational
Training, Line Operational Evaluation.
(13) AC 120-41, as amended, Criteria for Operational Approval of
Airborne Wind Shear Alerting and Flight Guidance Systems.
(14) AC 120-45, as amended, Airplane Flight Training Device
Qualification.
(14) AC 120-57, as amended, Surface Movement Guidance and Control
System (SMGCS).
(15) AC 150/5300-13, as amended, Airport Design.
(16) AC 150/5340-1, as amended, Standards for Airport Markings.
(17) AC 150/5340-4, as amended, Installation Details for Runway
Centerline Touchdown Zone Lighting Systems.
(18) AC 150/5340-19, as amended, Taxiway Centerline Lighting System.
(19) AC 150/5340-24, as amended, Runway and Taxiway Edge Lighting
System.
(20) AC 150/5345-28, as amended, Precision Approach Path Indicator
(PAPI) Systems.
(21) International Air Transport Association document, ``Flight
Simulation Training Device Design and Performance Data Requirements,''
as amended.
(22) AC 25-7, as amended, Flight Test Guide for Certification of
Transport Category Airplanes.
(23) AC 23-8A, as amended, Flight Test Guide for Certification of
Part 23 Airplanes.
(24) International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Manual of
Criteria for the Qualification of Flight Simulation Training Devices, as
amended.
(25) Aeroplane Flight Simulation Training Device Evaluation
Handbook, Volume I, as amended and Volume II, as amended, The Royal
Aeronautical Society, London, UK.
(26) FAA Airman Certification Standards and Practical Test Standards
for Airline Transport Pilot, Type Ratings, Commercial Pilot, and
Instrument Ratings.
(27) The FAA Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM). An electronic
version of the AIM is on the Internet at http://www.faa.gov/atpubs.
(28) Aeronautical Radio, Inc. (ARINC) document number 436, titled
Guidelines For Electronic Qualification Test Guide (as amended).
(29) Aeronautical Radio, Inc. (ARINC) document 610, Guidance for
Design and Integration of Aircraft Avionics Equipment in Simulators (as
amended).
________________________________________________________________________

End Information

2. Applicability (Sec. Sec.  60.1 and 60.2)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.1, Applicability, or to Sec.  60.2, Applicability of sponsor rules to
person who are not sponsors and who are engaged in certain unauthorized
activities.

3. Definitions (Sec.  60.3)

See appendix F of this part for a list of definitions and
abbreviations from part 1, part 60, and the QPS appendices of part 60.

4. Qualification Performance Standards (Sec.  60.4)

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.4, Qualification Performance Standards.

5. Quality Management System (Sec.  60.5)

Additional regulatory material and informational material regarding
Quality Management Systems for FTDs may be found in appendix E of this
part.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

6. Sponsor Qualification Requirements. (Sec.  60.7).

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

a. The intent of the language in Sec.  60.7(b) is to have a specific
FTD, identified by the sponsor, used at least once in an FAA-approved
flight training program for the airplane simulated during the 12-month
period described. The identification of the specific FTD may change from
one 12-month period to the next 12-month period as long as that sponsor
sponsors and uses at least one FTD at least once during the prescribed
period. There is no minimum number of hours or minimum FTD periods
required.
b. The following examples describe acceptable operational practices:
(1) Example One.
(a) A sponsor is sponsoring a single, specific FTD for its own use,
in its own facility or elsewhere-- this single FTD forms the basis for
the sponsorship. The sponsor uses that FTD at least once in each 12-
month period in that sponsor's FAA-approved flight training program for
the airplane simulated. This 12-month period is established according to
the following schedule:
(i) If the FTD was qualified prior to May 30, 2008, the 12-month
period begins on the date of the first continuing qualification
evaluation conducted in accordance with

[[Page 171]]

Sec.  60.19 after May 30, 2008, and continues for each subsequent 12-
month period;
(ii) A device qualified on or after May 30, 2008, will be required
to undergo an initial or upgrade evaluation in accordance with Sec.
60.15. Once the initial or upgrade evaluation is complete, the first
continuing qualification evaluation will be conducted within 6 months.
The 12 month continuing qualification evaluation cycle begins on that
date and continues for each subsequent 12-month period.
(b) There is no minimum number of hours of FTD use required.
(c) The identification of the specific FTD may change from one 12-
month period to the next 12-month period as long as that sponsor
sponsors and uses at least one FTD at least once during the prescribed
period.
(2) Example Two.
(a) A sponsor sponsors an additional number of FTDs, in its facility
or elsewhere. Each additionally sponsored FTD must be--
(i) Used by the sponsor in the sponsor's FAA-approved flight
training program for the airplane simulated (as described in Sec.
60.7(d)(1)); or
(ii) Used by another FAA certificate holder in that other
certificate holder's FAA-approved flight training program for the
airplane simulated (as described in Sec.  60.7(d)(1)). This 12-month
period is established in the same manner as in example one; or
(iii) Provided a statement each year from a qualified pilot, (after
having flown the airplane, not the subject FTD or another FTD, during
the preceding 12-month period) stating that the subject FTD's
performance and handling qualities represent the airplane (as described
in Sec.  60.7(d)(2)). This statement is provided at least once in each
12-month period established in the same manner as in example one.
(b) There is no minimum number of hours of FTD use required.
(3) Example Three.
(a) A sponsor in New York (in this example, a Part 142 certificate
holder) establishes ``satellite'' training centers in Chicago and
Moscow.
(b) The satellite function means that the Chicago and Moscow centers
must operate under the New York center's certificate (in accordance with
all of the New York center's practices, procedures, and policies; e.g.,
instructor and/or technician training/checking requirements, record
keeping, QMS program).
(c) All of the FTDs in the Chicago and Moscow centers could be dry-
leased (i.e., the certificate holder does not have and use FAA-approved
flight training programs for the FTDs in the Chicago and Moscow centers)
because--
(i) Each FTD in the Chicago center and each FTD in the Moscow center
is used at least once each 12-month period by another FAA certificate
holder in that other certificate holder's FAA-approved flight training
program for the airplane (as described in Sec.  60.7(d)(1)); or
(ii) A statement is obtained from a qualified pilot (having flown
the airplane, not the subject FTD or another FTD during the preceding
12-month period) stating that the performance and handling qualities of
each FTD in the Chicago and Moscow centers represents the airplane (as
described in Sec.  60.7(d)(2)).

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

7. Additional Responsibilities of the Sponsor (Sec.  60.9)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

The phrase ``as soon as practicable'' in Sec.  60.9(a) means without
unnecessarily disrupting or delaying beyond a reasonable time the
training, evaluation, or experience being conducted in the FTD.

8. FTD Use (Sec.  60.11)

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.11, FTD use.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________
9. FTD Objective Data Requirements (Sec.  60.13)
________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

a. Flight test data used to validate FTD performance and handling
qualities must have been gathered in accordance with a flight test
program containing the following:
(1) A flight test plan consisting of:
(a) The maneuvers and procedures required for aircraft certification
and simulation programming and validation.
(b) For each maneuver or procedure--
(i) The procedures and control input the flight test pilot and/or
engineer used.
(ii) The atmospheric and environmental conditions.
(iii) The initial flight conditions.
(iv) The airplane configuration, including weight and center of
gravity.
(v) The data to be gathered.
(vi) All other information necessary to recreate the flight test
conditions in the FTD.
(2) Appropriately qualified flight test personnel.
(3) An understanding of the accuracy of the data to be gathered
using appropriate alternative data sources, procedures, and
instrumentation that is traceable to a recognized

[[Page 172]]

standard as described in Attachment 2, Table B2F of this appendix.
(4) Appropriate and sufficient data acquisition equipment or
system(s), including appropriate data reduction and analysis methods and
techniques, acceptable to the FAA's Aircraft Certification Service.
b. The data, regardless of source, must be presented:
(1) In a format that supports the FTD validation process;
(2) In a manner that is clearly readable and annotated correctly and
completely;
(3) With resolution sufficient to determine compliance with the
tolerances set forth in Attachment 2, Table B2A, Appendix B;
(4) With any necessary guidance information provided; and
(5) Without alteration, adjustments, or bias. Data may be corrected
to address known data calibration errors provided that an explanation of
the methods used to correct the errors appears in the QTG. The corrected
data may be re-scaled, digitized, or otherwise manipulated to fit the
desired presentation.
c. After completion of any additional flight test, a flight test
report must be submitted in support of the validation data. The report
must contain sufficient data and rationale to support qualification of
the FTD at the level requested.
d. As required by Sec.  60.13(f), the sponsor must notify the
responsible Flight Standards office when it becomes aware that an
addition to or a revision of the flight related data or airplane systems
related data is available if this data is used to program and operate a
qualified FTD. The data referred to in this sub-section are those data
that are used to validate the performance, handling qualities, or other
characteristics of the aircraft, including data related to any relevant
changes occurring after the type certification is issued. The sponsor
must--
(1) Within 10 calendar days, notify the responsible Flight Standards
office of the existence of this data; and
(2) Within 45 calendar days, notify the responsible Flight Standards
office of--
(i) The schedule to incorporate this data into the FTD; or
(ii) The reason for not incorporating this data into the FTD.
e. In those cases where the objective test results authorize a
``snapshot test'' or a ``series of snapshot test results'' in lieu of a
time-history result, the sponsor or other data provider must ensure that
a steady state condition exists at the instant of time captured by the
``snapshot.'' The steady state condition must exist from 4 seconds prior
to, through 1 second following, the instant of time captured by the snap
shot.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

f. The FTD sponsor is encouraged to maintain a liaison with the
manufacturer of the aircraft being simulated (or with the holder of the
aircraft type certificate for the aircraft being simulated if the
manufacturer is no longer in business), and if appropriate, with the
person having supplied the aircraft data package for the FTD in order to
facilitate the notification described in this paragraph.
g. It is the intent of the responsible Flight Standards office that
for new aircraft entering service, at a point well in advance of
preparation of the QTG, the sponsor should submit to the responsible
Flight Standards office for approval, a descriptive document (see
Appendix A, Table A2C, Sample Validation Data Roadmap for Airplanes)
containing the plan for acquiring the validation data, including data
sources. This document should clearly identify sources of data for all
required tests, a description of the validity of these data for a
specific engine type and thrust rating configuration, and the revision
levels of all avionics affecting the performance or flying qualities of
the aircraft. Additionally, this document should provide other
information such as the rationale or explanation for cases where data or
data parameters are missing, instances where engineering simulation data
are used, or where flight test methods require further explanations. It
should also provide a brief narrative describing the cause and effect of
any deviation from data requirements. The aircraft manufacturer may
provide this document.
h. There is no requirement for any flight test data supplier to
submit a flight test plan or program prior to gathering flight test
data. However, the responsible Flight Standards office notes that
inexperienced data gatherers often provide data that is irrelevant,
improperly marked, or lacking adequate justification for selection.
Other problems include inadequate information regarding initial
conditions or test maneuvers. The responsible Flight Standards office
has been forced to refuse these data submissions as validation data for
an FTD evaluation. It is for this reason that the responsible Flight
Standards office recommends that any data supplier not previously
experienced in this area review the data necessary for programming and
for validating the performance of the FTD and discuss the flight test
plan anticipated for acquiring such data with the responsible Flight
Standards office well in advance of commencing the flight tests.
i. The responsible Flight Standards office will consider, on a case-
by-case basis, whether to approve supplemental validation data derived
from flight data recording systems such as a Quick Access Recorder or
Flight Data Recorder.

[[Page 173]]

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

10. Special Equipment and Personnel Requirements for Qualification of
the FTD (Sec.  60.14).

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

a. In the event that the responsible Flight Standards office
determines that special equipment or specifically qualified persons will
be required to conduct an evaluation, the responsible Flight Standards
office will make every attempt to notify the sponsor at least one (1)
week, but in no case less than 72 hours, in advance of the evaluation.
Examples of special equipment include flight control measurement
devices, accelerometers, or oscilloscopes. Examples of specially
qualified personnel include individuals specifically qualified to
install or use any special equipment when its use is required.
b. Examples of a special evaluation include an evaluation conducted
after: An FTD is moved; at the request of the TPAA; or as a result of
comments received from users of the FTD that raise questions about the
continued qualification or use of the FTD.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

11. Initial (and Upgrade) Qualification Requirements (Sec.  60.15).

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirement

a. In order to be qualified at a particular qualification level, the
FTD must:
(1) Meet the general requirements listed in Attachment 1 of this
appendix;
(2) Meet the objective testing requirements listed in Attachment 2
of this appendix (Level 4 FTDs do not require objective tests); and
(3) Satisfactorily accomplish the subjective tests listed in
Attachment 3 of this appendix.
b. The request described in Sec.  60.15(a) must include all of the
following:
(1) A statement that the FTD meets all of the applicable provisions
of this part and all applicable provisions of the QPS.
(2) Unless otherwise authorized through prior coordination with the
responsible Flight Standards office, a confirmation that the sponsor
will forward to the responsible Flight Standards office the statement
described in Sec.  60.15(b) in such time as to be received no later than
5 business days prior to the scheduled evaluation and may be forwarded
to the responsible Flight Standards office via traditional or electronic
means.
(3) Except for a Level 4 FTD, a QTG, acceptable to the responsible
Flight Standards office, that includes all of the following:
(a) Objective data obtained from aircraft testing or another
approved source.
(b) Correlating objective test results obtained from the performance
of the FTD as prescribed in the appropriate QPS.
(c) The result of FTD subjective tests prescribed in the appropriate
QPS.
(d) A description of the equipment necessary to perform the
evaluation for initial qualification and the continuing qualification
evaluations.
c. The QTG described in paragraph a(3) of this section, must provide
the documented proof of compliance with the FTD objective tests in
Attachment 2, Table B2A of this appendix.
d. The QTG is prepared and submitted by the sponsor, or the
sponsor?s agent on behalf of the sponsor, to the responsible Flight
Standards office for review and approval, and must include, for each
objective test:
(1) Parameters, tolerances, and flight conditions;
(2) Pertinent and complete instructions for conducting automatic and
manual tests;
(3) A means of comparing the FTD test results to the objective data;
(4) Any other information as necessary to assist in the evaluation
of the test results;
(5) Other information appropriate to the qualification level of the
FTD.
e. The QTG described in paragraphs (a)(3) and (b) of this section,
must include the following:
(1) A QTG cover page with sponsor and FAA approval signature blocks
(see Attachment 4, Figure B4C, of this appendix, for a sample QTG cover
page).
(2) [Reserved]
(3) An FTD information page that provides the information listed in
this paragraph, if applicable (see Attachment 4, Figure B4B, of this
appendix, for a sample FTD information page). For convertible FTDs, the
sponsor must submit a separate page for each configuration of the FTD.
(a) The sponsor's FTD identification number or code.
(b) The airplane model and series being simulated.
(c) The aerodynamic data revision number or reference.
(d) The source of the basic aerodynamic model and the aerodynamic
coefficient data used to modify the basic model.
(e) The engine model(s) and its data revision number or reference.
(f) The flight control data revision number or reference.
(g) The flight management system identification and revision level.
(h) The FTD model and manufacturer.
(i) The date of FTD manufacture.
(j) The FTD computer identification.

[[Page 174]]

(k) The visual system model and manufacturer, including display
type.
(l) The motion system type and manufacturer, including degrees of
freedom.
(4) A Table of Contents.
(5) A log of revisions and a list of effective pages.
(6) List of all relevant data references.
(7) A glossary of terms and symbols used (including sign conventions
and units).
(8) Statements of compliance and capability (SOCs) with certain
requirements.
(9) Recording procedures or equipment required to accomplish the
objective tests.
(10) The following information for each objective test designated in
Attachment 2 of this appendix, as applicable to the qualification level
sought:
(a) Name of the test.
(b) Objective of the test.
(c) Initial conditions.
(d) Manual test procedures.
(e) Automatic test procedures (if applicable).
(f) Method for evaluating FTD objective test results.
(g) List of all relevant parameters driven or constrained during the
automatic test(s).
(h) List of all relevant parameters driven or constrained during the
manual test(s).
(i) Tolerances for relevant parameters.
(j) Source of Validation Data (document and page number).
(k) Copy of the Validation Data (if located in a separate binder, a
cross reference for the identification and page number for pertinent
data location must be provided).
(l) FTD Objective Test Results as obtained by the sponsor. Each test
result must reflect the date completed and must be clearly labeled as a
product of the device being tested.
f. A convertible FTD is addressed as a separate FTD for each model
and series airplane to which it will be converted and for the FAA
qualification level sought. The responsible Flight Standards office will
conduct an evaluation for each configuration. If a sponsor seeks
qualification for two or more models of an airplane type using a
convertible FTD, the sponsor must provide a QTG for each airplane model,
or a QTG for the first airplane model and a supplement to that QTG for
each additional airplane model. The responsible Flight Standards office
will conduct evaluations for each airplane model.
g. The form and manner of presentation of objective test results in
the QTG must include the following:
(1) The sponsor's FTD test results must be recorded in a manner
acceptable to the responsible Flight Standards office, that allows easy
comparison of the FTD test results to the validation data (e.g., use of
a multi-channel recorder, line printer, cross plotting, overlays,
transparencies).
(2) FTD results must be labeled using terminology common to airplane
parameters as opposed to computer software identifications.
(3) Validation data documents included in a QTG may be
photographically reduced only if such reduction will not alter the
graphic scaling or cause difficulties in scale interpretation or
resolution.
(4) Scaling on graphical presentations must provide the resolution
necessary to evaluate the parameters shown in Attachment 2, Table B2A of
this appendix.
(5) Tests involving time histories, data sheets (or transparencies
thereof) and FTD test results must be clearly marked with appropriate
reference points to ensure an accurate comparison between FTD and
airplane with respect to time. Time histories recorded via a line
printer are to be clearly identified for cross-plotting on the airplane
data. Over-plots may not obscure the reference data.
h. The sponsor may elect to complete the QTG objective and
subjective tests at the manufacturer's facility or at the sponsor's
training facility (or other sponsor designated location where training
will take place). If the tests are conducted at the manufacturer's
facility, the sponsor must repeat at least one-third of the tests at the
sponsor's training facility in order to substantiate FTD performance.
The QTG must be clearly annotated to indicate when and where each test
was accomplished. Tests conducted at the manufacturer's facility and at
the sponsor's designated training facility must be conducted after the
FTD is assembled with systems and sub-systems functional and operating
in an interactive manner. The test results must be submitted to the
responsible Flight Standards office.
i. The sponsor must maintain a copy of the MQTG at the FTD location.
j. All FTDs for which the initial qualification is conducted after
May 30, 2014, must have an electronic MQTG (Emqtg) including all
objective data obtained from airplane testing, or another approved
source (reformatted or digitized), together with correlating objective
test results obtained from the performance of the FTD (reformatted or
digitized) as prescribed in this appendix. The Emqtg must also contain
the general FTD performance or demonstration results (reformatted or
digitized) prescribed in this appendix, and a description of the
equipment necessary to perform the initial qualification evaluation and
the continuing qualification evaluations. The Emqtg must include the
original validation data used to validate FTD performance and handling
qualities in either the original digitized format from the data supplier
or an electronic scan of the original time-history plots that were
provided by the data supplier. A copy of the Emqtg must be provided to
the responsible Flight Standards office.
k. All other FTDs (not covered in subparagraph ``j'') must have an
electronic copy of

[[Page 175]]

the MQTG by and after May 30, 2014. An electronic copy of the copy of
the MQTG must be provided to the responsible Flight Standards office.
This may be provided by an electronic scan presented in a Portable
Document File (PDF), or similar format acceptable to the responsible
Flight Standards office.
l. During the initial (or upgrade) qualification evaluation
conducted by the responsible Flight Standards office, the sponsor must
also provide a person knowledgeable about the operation of the aircraft
and the operation of the FTD.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

m. Only those FTDs that are sponsored by a certificate holder as
defined in Appendix F will be evaluated by the responsible Flight
Standards office. However, other FTD evaluations may be conducted on a
case-by-case basis as the Administrator deems appropriate, but only in
accordance with applicable agreements.
n. The responsible Flight Standards office will conduct an
evaluation for each configuration, and each FTD must be evaluated as
completely as possible. To ensure a thorough and uniform evaluation,
each FTD is subjected to the general FTD requirements in Attachment 1 of
this appendix, the objective tests listed in Attachment 2 of this
appendix, and the subjective tests listed in Attachment 3 of this
appendix. The evaluations described herein will include, but not
necessarily be limited to the following:
(1) Airplane responses, including longitudinal and lateral-
directional control responses (see Attachment 2 of this appendix);
(2) Performance in authorized portions of the simulated airplane's
operating envelope, to include tasks evaluated by the responsible Flight
Standards office in the areas of surface operations, takeoff, climb,
cruise, descent, approach and landing, as well as abnormal and emergency
operations (see Attachment 2 of this appendix);
(3) Control checks (see Attachment 1 and Attachment 2 of this
appendix);
(4) Flight deck configuration (see Attachment 1 of this appendix);
(5) Pilot, flight engineer, and instructor station functions checks
(see Attachment 1 and Attachment 3 of this appendix);
(6) Airplane systems and sub-systems (as appropriate) as compared to
the airplane simulated (see Attachment 1 and Attachment 3 of this
appendix);
(7) FTD systems and sub-systems, including force cueing (motion),
visual, and aural (sound) systems, as appropriate (see Attachment 1 and
Attachment 2 of this appendix); and
(8) Certain additional requirements, depending upon the
qualification level sought, including equipment or circumstances that
may become hazardous to the occupants. The sponsor may be subject to
Occupational Safety and Health Administration requirements.
o. The responsible Flight Standards office administers the objective
and subjective tests, which includes an examination of functions. The
tests include a qualitative assessment of the FTD by a pilot from the
responsible Flight Standards office. The evaluation team leader may
assign other qualified personnel to assist in accomplishing the
functions examination and/or the objective and subjective tests
performed during an evaluation when required.
(1) Objective tests provide a basis for measuring and evaluating FTD
performance and determining compliance with the requirements of this
part.
(2) Subjective tests provide a basis for:
(a) Evaluating the capability of the FTD to perform over a typical
utilization period;
(b) Determining that the FTD satisfactorily simulates each required
task;
(c) Verifying correct operation of the FTD controls, instruments,
and systems; and
(d) Demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this part.
p. The tolerances for the test parameters listed in Attachment 2 of
this appendix reflect the range of tolerances acceptable to the
responsible Flight Standards office for FTD validation and are not to be
confused with design tolerances specified for FTD manufacture. In making
decisions regarding tests and test results, the responsible Flight
Standards office relies on the use of operational and engineering
judgment in the application of data (including consideration of the way
in which the flight test was flown and way the data was gathered and
applied), data presentations, and the applicable tolerances for each
test.
q. In addition to the scheduled continuing qualification evaluation,
each FTD is subject to evaluations conducted by the responsible Flight
Standards office at any time without prior notification to the sponsor.
Such evaluations would be accomplished in a normal manner (i.e.,
requiring exclusive use of the FTD for the conduct of objective and
subjective tests and an examination of functions) if the FTD is not
being used for flight crewmember training, testing, or checking.
However, if the FTD were being used, the evaluation would be conducted
in a non-exclusive manner. This non-exclusive evaluation will be
conducted by the FTD evaluator accompanying the check airman,
instructor, Aircrew Program Designee (APD), or FAA inspector aboard the
FTD along with the student(s) and observing the operation of the FTD
during the training, testing, or checking activities.

[[Page 176]]

r. Problems with objective test results are handled as follows:
(1) If a problem with an objective test result is detected by the
evaluation team during an evaluation, the test may be repeated or the
QTG may be amended.
(2) If it is determined that the results of an objective test do not
support the qualification level requested but do support a lower level,
the responsible Flight Standards office may qualify the FTD at a lower
level. For example, if a Level 6 evaluation is requested, but the FTD
fails to meet the spiral stability test tolerances, it could be
qualified at Level 5.
s. After an FTD is successfully evaluated, the responsible Flight
Standards office issues an SOQ to the sponsor, the responsible Flight
Standards office recommends the FTD to the TPAA, who will approve the
FTD for use in a flight training program. The SOQ will be issued at the
satisfactory conclusion of the initial or continuing qualification
evaluation and will list the tasks for which the FTD is qualified,
referencing the tasks described in Table B1B in Attachment 1 of this
appendix. However, it is the sponsor's responsibility to obtain TPAA
approval prior to using the FTD in an FAA-approved flight training
program.
t. Under normal circumstances, the responsible Flight Standards
office establishes a date for the initial or upgrade evaluation within
ten (10) working days after determining that a complete QTG is
acceptable. Unusual circumstances may warrant establishing an evaluation
date before this determination is made. A sponsor may schedule an
evaluation date as early as 6 months in advance. However, there may be a
delay of 45 days or more in rescheduling and completing the evaluation
if the sponsor is unable to meet the scheduled date. See Attachment 4,
Figure B4A, Sample Request for Initial, Upgrade, or Reinstatement
Evaluation, of this appendix.
u. The numbering system used for objective test results in the QTG
should closely follow the numbering system set out in Attachment 2, FTD
Objective Tests, Table B2A, of this appendix.
v. Contact the responsible Flight Standards office for additional
information regarding the preferred qualifications of pilots used to
meet the requirements of Sec.  60.15(d).
w. Examples of the exclusions for which the FTD might not have been
subjectively tested by the sponsor or the responsible Flight Standards
office and for which qualification might not be sought or granted, as
described in Sec.  60.15(g)(6), include engine out maneuvers or circling
approaches.

12. Additional Qualifications for Currently Qualified FTDs (Sec.
60.16).

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.16, Additional Qualifications for a Currently Qualified FTD.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

13. Previously Qualified FTDs (Sec.  60.17).

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

a. In instances where a sponsor plans to remove an FTD from active
status for a period of less than two years, the following procedures
apply:
(1) The responsible Flight Standards office must be notified in
writing and the notification must include an estimate of the period that
the FTD will be inactive;
(2) Continuing Qualification evaluations will not be scheduled
during the inactive period;
(3) The responsible Flight Standards office will remove the FTD from
the list of qualified FTDs on a mutually established date not later than
the date on which the first missed continuing qualification evaluation
would have been scheduled;
(4) Before the FTD is restored to qualified status, it must be
evaluated by the responsible Flight Standards office. The evaluation
content and the time required to accomplish the evaluation is based on
the number of continuing qualification evaluations and sponsor-conducted
quarterly inspections missed during the period of inactivity.
(5) The sponsor must notify the responsible Flight Standards office
of any changes to the original scheduled time out of service;
b. FTDs qualified prior to May 31, 2016, and replacement FTD
systems, are not required to meet the general FTD requirements, the
objective test requirements, and the subjective test requirements of
Attachments 1, 2, and 3 of this appendix as long as the FTD continues to
meet the test requirements contained in the MQTG developed under the
original qualification basis.
c. [Reserved]
d. FTDs qualified prior to May 31, 2016, may be updated. If an
evaluation is deemed appropriate or necessary by the responsible Flight
Standards office after such an update, the evaluation will not require
an evaluation to standards beyond those against which the FTD was
originally qualified.
e. Other certificate holders or persons desiring to use an FTD may
contract with FTD sponsors to use FTDs previously qualified at a
particular level for an airplane type and approved for use within an
FAA-approved flight training program. Such FTDs are not required to
undergo an additional qualification process, except as described in
Sec.  60.16.

[[Page 177]]

f. Each FTD user must obtain approval from the appropriate TPAA to
use any FTD in an FAA-approved flight training program.
g. The intent of the requirement listed in Sec.  60.17(b), for each
FTD to have an SOQ within 6 years, is to have the availability of that
statement (including the configuration list and the limitations to
authorizations) to provide a complete picture of the FTD inventory
regulated by the FAA. The issuance of the statement will not require any
additional evaluation or require any adjustment to the evaluation basis
for the FTD.
h. Downgrading of an FTD is a permanent change in qualification
level and will necessitate the issuance of a revised SOQ to reflect the
revised qualification level, as appropriate. If a temporary restriction
is placed on an FTD because of a missing, malfunctioning, or inoperative
component or on-going repairs, the restriction is not a permanent change
in qualification level. Instead, the restriction is temporary and is
removed when the reason for the restriction has been resolved.
i. The responsible Flight Standards office will determine the
evaluation criteria for an FTD that has been removed from active status
for a prolonged period. The criteria will be based on the number of
continuing qualification evaluations and quarterly inspections missed
during the period of inactivity. For example, if the FTD were out of
service for a 1 year period, it would be necessary to complete the
entire QTG, since all of the quarterly evaluations would have been
missed. The responsible Flight Standards office will also consider how
the FTD was stored, whether parts were removed from the FTD and whether
the FTD was disassembled.
j. The FTD will normally be requalified using the FAA-approved MQTG
and the criteria that was in effect prior to its removal from
qualification. However, inactive periods of 2 years or more will require
re-qualification under the standards in effect and current at the time
of requalification.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

14. Inspection, Continuing Qualification, Evaluation, and Maintenance
Requirements (Sec.  60.19).

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirement

a. The sponsor must conduct a minimum of four evenly spaced
inspections throughout the year. The objective test sequence and content
of each inspection in this sequence must be developed by the sponsor and
must be acceptable to the responsible Flight Standards office.
b. The description of the functional preflight check must be
contained in the sponsor's QMS.
c. Record ``functional preflight'' in the FTD discrepancy log book
or other acceptable location, including any item found to be missing,
malfunctioning, or inoperative.
d. During the continuing qualification evaluation conducted by the
responsible Flight Standards office, the sponsor must also provide a
person knowledgeable about the operation of the aircraft and the
operation of the FTD.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

e. The sponsor's test sequence and the content of each quarterly
inspection required in Sec.  60.19(a)(1) should include a balance and a
mix from the objective test requirement areas listed as follows:
(1) Performance.
(2) Handling qualities.
(3) Motion system (where appropriate).
(4) Visual system (where appropriate).
(5) Sound system (where appropriate).
(6) Other FTD systems.
f. If the evaluator plans to accomplish specific tests during a
normal continuing qualification evaluation that requires the use of
special equipment or technicians, the sponsor will be notified as far in
advance of the evaluation as practical; but not less than 72 hours.
Examples of such tests include latencies, control sweeps, or motion or
visual system tests.
g. The continuing qualification evaluations described in Sec.
60.19(b) will normally require 4 hours of FTD time. However, flexibility
is necessary to address abnormal situations or situations involving
aircraft with additional levels of complexity (e.g., computer controlled
aircraft). The sponsor should anticipate that some tests may require
additional time. The continuing qualification evaluations will consist
of the following:
(1) Review of the results of the quarterly inspections conducted by
the sponsor since the last scheduled continuing qualification
evaluation.
(2) A selection of approximately 8 to 15 objective tests from the
MQTG that provide an adequate opportunity to evaluate the performance of
the FTD. The tests chosen will be performed either automatically or
manually and should be able to be conducted within approximately one-
third (1/3) of the allotted FTD time.
(3) A subjective evaluation of the FTD to perform a representative
sampling of the tasks set out in attachment 3 of this appendix. This
portion of the evaluation should

[[Page 178]]

take approximately two-thirds (2/3) of the allotted FTD time.
(4) An examination of the functions of the FTD may include the
motion system, visual system, sound system as applicable, instructor
operating station, and the normal functions and simulated malfunctions
of the airplane systems. This examination is normally accomplished
simultaneously with the subjective evaluation requirements.
h. The requirement established in Sec.  60.19(b)(4) regarding the
frequency of responsible Flight Standards office-conducted continuing
qualification evaluations for each FTD is typically 12 months. However,
the establishment and satisfactory implementation of an approved QMS for
a sponsor will provide a basis for adjusting the frequency of
evaluations to exceed 12-month intervals.

15. Logging FTD Discrepancies (Sec.  60.20)

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.20. Logging FTD Discrepancies.

16. Interim Qualification of FTDs for New Airplane Types or Models
(Sec.  60.21)

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.21, Interim Qualification of FTDs for New Airplane Types or Models.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

17. Modifications to FTDs (Sec.  60.23)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

a. The notification described in Sec.  60.23(c)(2) must include a
complete description of the planned modification, with a description of
the operational and engineering effect the proposed modification will
have on the operation of the FTD and the results that are expected with
the modification incorporated.
b. Prior to using the modified FTD:
(1) All the applicable objective tests completed with the
modification incorporated, including any necessary updates to the MQTG
(e.g., accomplishment of FSTD Directives) must be acceptable to the
responsible Flight Standards office; and
(2) The sponsor must provide the responsible Flight Standards office
with a statement signed by the MR that the factors listed in Sec.
60.15(b) are addressed by the appropriate personnel as described in that
section.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

c. FSTD Directives are considered modification of an FTD. See
Attachment 4 of this appendix for a sample index of effective FSTD
Directives.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

18. Operation with Missing, Malfunctioning, or Inoperative Components
(Sec.  60.25)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

a. The sponsor's responsibility with respect to Sec.  60.25(a) is
satisfied when the sponsor fairly and accurately advises the user of the
current status of an FTD, including any missing, malfunctioning, or
inoperative (MMI) component(s).
b. It is the responsibility of the instructor, check airman, or
representative of the administrator conducting training, testing, or
checking to exercise reasonable and prudent judgment to determine if any
MMI component is necessary for the satisfactory completion of a specific
maneuver, procedure, or task.
c. If the 29th or 30th day of the 30-day period described in
60.25(b) is on a Saturday, a Sunday, or a holiday, the FAA will extend
the deadline until the next business day.
d. In accordance with the authorization described in Sec.  60.25(b),
the sponsor may develop a discrepancy prioritizing system to accomplish
repairs based on the level of impact on the capability of the FTD.
Repairs having a larger impact on the FTD's ability to provide the
required training, evaluation, or flight experience will have a higher
priority for repair or replacement.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

19. Automatic Loss of Qualification and Procedures for Restoration of
Qualification (Sec.  60.27)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

If the sponsor provides a plan for how the FTD will be maintained
during its out-of-service period (e.g., periodic exercise of mechanical,
hydraulic, and electrical systems; routine replacement of hydraulic
fluid; control of the environmental factors in which the FTD is to be
maintained) there is a greater likelihood that the responsible Flight
Standards office will be able to determine the amount of testing that
required for requalification.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

[[Page 179]]

20. Other Losses of Qualification and Procedures for Restoration of
Qualification (Sec.  60.29)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

If the sponsor provides a plan for how the FTD will be maintained
during its out-of-service period (e.g., periodic exercise of mechanical,
hydraulic, and electrical systems; routine replacement of hydraulic
fluid; control of the environmental factors in which the FTD is to be
maintained) there is a greater likelihood that the responsible Flight
Standards office will be able to determine the amount of testing that
required for requalification.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

21. Recordkeeping and Reporting (Sec.  60.31)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

a. FTD modifications can include hardware or software changes. For
FTD modifications involving software programming changes, the record
required by Sec.  60.31(a)(2) must consist of the name of the aircraft
system software, aerodynamic model, or engine model change, the date of
the change, a summary of the change, and the reason for the change.
b. If a coded form for record keeping is used, it must provide for
the preservation and retrieval of information with appropriate security
or controls to prevent the inappropriate alteration of such records
after the fact.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

22. Applications, Logbooks, Reports, and Records: Fraud, Falsification,
or Incorrect Statements (Sec.  60.33)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.33, Applications, Logbooks, Reports, and Records: Fraud,
Falsification, or Incorrect Statements.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

23. [Reserved]

24. Levels of FTD.

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

a. The following is a general description of each level of FTD.
Detailed standards and tests for the various levels of FTDs are fully
defined in Attachments 1 through 3 of this appendix.
(1) Level 4. A device that may have an open airplane-specific flight
deck area, or an enclosed airplane-specific flight deck and at least one
operating system. Air/ground logic is required (no aerodynamic
programming required). All displays may be flat/LCD panel
representations or actual representations of displays in the aircraft.
All controls, switches, and knobs may be touch sensitive activation (not
capable of manual manipulation of the flight controls) or may physically
replicate the aircraft in control operation.
(2) Level 5. A device that may have an open airplane-specific flight
deck area, or an enclosed airplane-specific flight deck; generic
aerodynamic programming; at least one operating system; and control
loading that is representative of the simulated airplane only at an
approach speed and configuration. All displays may be flat/LCD panel
representations or actual representations of displays in the aircraft.
Primary and secondary flight controls (e.g., rudder, aileron, elevator,
flaps, spoilers/speed brakes, engine controls, landing gear, nosewheel
steering, trim, brakes) must be physical controls. All other controls,
switches, and knobs may be touch sensitive activation.
(3) Level 6. A device that has an enclosed airplane-specific flight
deck; airplane-specific aerodynamic programming; all applicable airplane
systems operating; control loading that is representative of the
simulated airplane throughout its ground and flight envelope; and
significant sound representation. All displays may be flat/LCD panel
representations or actual representations of displays in the aircraft,
but all controls, switches, and knobs must physically replicate the
aircraft in control operation.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

(4) Level 7. A Level 7 device is one that has an enclosed airplane-
specific flight deck and aerodynamic program with all applicable
airplane systems operating and control loading that is representative of
the simulated airplane throughout its ground and flight envelope and
significant sound representation. All displays may be flat/LCD panel
representations or actual representations of displays in the aircraft,
but all controls, switches, and knobs must physically replicate the
aircraft in control operation. It also has a visual system that provides
an out-of-the-flight deck view, providing cross-flight deck viewing (for
both pilots simultaneously) of a

[[Page 180]]

field-of-view of at least 180[deg] horizontally and 40[deg] vertically.

25. FTD Qualification on the Basis of a Bilateral Aviation Safety
Agreement (BASA) (Sec.  60.37)

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

No additional regulatory or informational material applies to Sec.
60.37, FTD Qualification on the Basis of a Bilateral Aviation Safety
Agreement (BASA).

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

Attachment 1 to Appendix B to Part 60--General FTD REQUIREMENTS

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

1. Requirements

a. Certain requirements included in this appendix must be supported
with an SOC as defined in Appendix F, which may include objective and
subjective tests. The requirements for SOCs are indicated in the
``General FTD Requirements'' column in Table B1A of this appendix.
b. Table B1A describes the requirements for the indicated level of
FTD. Many devices include operational systems or functions that exceed
the requirements outlined in this section. In any event, all systems
will be tested and evaluated in accordance with this appendix to ensure
proper operation.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

2. Discussion

a. This attachment describes the general requirements for qualifying
Level 4 through Level 6 FTDs. The sponsor should also consult the
objectives tests in Attachment 2 of this appendix and the examination of
functions and subjective tests listed in Attachment 3 of this appendix
to determine the complete requirements for a specific level FTD.
b. The material contained in this attachment is divided into the
following categories:
(1) General Flight deck Configuration.
(2) Programming.
(3) Equipment Operation.
(4) Equipment and facilities for instructor/evaluator functions.
(5) Motion System.
(6) Visual System.
(7) Sound System.
c. Table B1A provides the standards for the General FTD
Requirements.
d. Table B1B provides the tasks that the sponsor will examine to
determine whether the FTD satisfactorily meets the requirements for
flight crew training, testing, and experience, and provides the tasks
for which the simulator may be qualified.
e. Table B1C provides the functions that an instructor/check airman
must be able to control in the simulator.
f. It is not required that all of the tasks that appear on the List
of Qualified Tasks (part of the SOQ) be accomplished during the initial
or continuing qualification evaluation.

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

[[Page 181]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.057


[[Page 182]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.058


[[Page 183]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.059


[[Page 184]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.060


[[Page 185]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.061


[[Page 186]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.062


[[Page 187]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.063


[[Page 188]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.064


[[Page 189]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.065


[[Page 190]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.066


[[Page 191]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.067


[[Page 192]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.068


[[Page 193]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.069


[[Page 194]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.070


[[Page 195]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09DE22.071


[[Page 196]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.091


[[Page 197]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.092


[[Page 198]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20MY16.093


[[Page 199]]



Table B1C--Table of FTD System Tasks QPS requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
QPS Requirements                       Information
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subjective         FTD level
Requirements In order ---------------
to be qualified at
the FTD qualification
level indicated, the
Entry No.    FTD must be able to                          Notes
perform at least the   4    5    6
tasks associated with
that level of
qualification.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Instructor Operating Station (IOS).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.a........  Power switch(es).....   X    X    X
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.b........  Airplane conditions..   A    X    X   e.g., GW, CG, Fuel
loading, Systems,
Ground Crew.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.c........  Airports/Runways.....   X    X    X   e.g., Selection and
Presets; Surface and
Lighting controls if
equipped with a
visual system.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.d........  Environmental           X    X    X   e.g., Temp, Wind.
controls.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.e........  Airplane system         A    X    X
malfunctions
(Insertion/deletion).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.f........  Locks, Freezes, and     X    X    X
Repositioning.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.g........  Sound Controls. (On/    X    X    X
off/adjustment).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.h........  Motion/Control          A    A    A
Loading System, as
appropriate. On/off/
emergency stop.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Observer Seats/Stations.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.a........  Position/Adjustment/    X    X   X
Positive restraint
system.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note 1: An ``A'' in the table indicates that the system, task, or
procedure, although not required to be present, may be examined if the
appropriate system is in the FTD and is working properly.

Attachment 2 to Appendix B to Part 60--Flight Training Device (FTD)
Objective Tests

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

1. Discussion

a. For the purposes of this attachment, the flight conditions
specified in the Flight Conditions Column of Table B2A, are defined as
follows:
(1) Ground--on ground, independent of airplane configuration;
(2) Take-off--gear down with flaps/slats in any certified takeoff
position;
(3) First segment climb--gear down with flaps/slats in any certified
takeoff position (normally not above 50 ft AGL);
(4) Second segment climb--gear up with flaps/slats in any certified
takeoff position (normally between 50 ft and 400 ft AGL);
(5) Clean--flaps/slats retracted and gear up;
(6) Cruise--clean configuration at cruise altitude and airspeed;
(7) Approach--gear up or down with flaps/slats at any normal
approach position as recommended by the airplane manufacturer; and
(8) Landing--gear down with flaps/slats in any certified landing
position.
b. The format for numbering the objective tests in Appendix A,
Attachment 2, Table A2A, and the objective tests in Appendix B,
Attachment 2, Table B2A, is identical. However, each test required for
FFSs is not necessarily required for FTDs. Also, each test required for
FTDs is not necessarily required for FFSs. Therefore, when a test number
(or series of numbers) is not required, the term ``Reserved'' is used in
the table at that location. Following this numbering format provides a
degree of commonality between the two tables and substantially reduces
the potential for confusion when referring to objective test numbers for
either FFSs or FTDs.
c. The reader is encouraged to review the Airplane Flight Simulator
Evaluation Handbook, Volumes I and II, published by the Royal
Aeronautical Society, London, UK, and FAA AC 25-7, as amended, Flight
Test Guide for Certification of Transport Category Airplanes, and AC 23-
8, as amended, Flight Test Guide for Certification of Part 23 Airplanes,
for references and examples regarding flight testing requirements and
techniques.
d. If relevant winds are present in the objective data, the wind
vector should be clearly noted as part of the data presentation,
expressed in conventional terminology, and related to the runway being
used for the test.
e. A Level 4 FTD does not require objective tests and therefore,
Level 4 is not addressed in the following table.

[[Page 200]]

End Information

________________________________________________________________________

Begin QPS Requirements

2. Test Requirements

a. The ground and flight tests required for qualification are listed
in Table B2A Objective Tests. Computer generated FTD test results must
be provided for each test except where an alternate test is specifically
authorized by the responsible Flight Standards office. If a flight
condition or operating condition is required for the test but does not
apply to the airplane being simulated or to the qualification level
sought, it may be disregarded (e.g., an engine out missed approach for a
single-engine airplane; a maneuver using reverse thrust for an airplane
without reverse thrust capability). Each test result is compared against
the validation data described in Sec.  60.13, and in Appendix B. The
results must be produced on an appropriate recording device acceptable
to the responsible Flight Standards office and must include FTD number,
date, time, conditions, tolerances, and appropriate dependent variables
portrayed in comparison to the validation data. Time histories are
required unless otherwise indicated in Table B2A. All results must be
labeled using the tolerances and units given.
b. Table B2A in this attachment sets out the test results required,
including the parameters, tolerances, and flight conditions for FTD
validation. Tolerances are provided for the listed tests because
mathematical modeling and acquisition and development of reference data
are often inexact. All tolerances listed in the following tables are
applied to FTD performance. When two tolerance values are given for a
parameter, the less restrictive may be used unless otherwise indicated.
In those cases where a tolerance is expressed only as a percentage, the
tolerance percentage applies to the maximum value of that parameter
within its normal operating range as measured from the neutral or zero
position unless otherwise indicated.
c. Certain tests included in this attachment must be supported with
a SOC. In Table B2A, requirements for SOCs are indicated in the ``Test
Details'' column.
d. When operational or engineering judgment is used in making
assessments for flight test data applications for FTD validity, such
judgment may not be limited to a single parameter. For example, data
that exhibit rapid variations of the measured parameters may require
interpolations or a ``best fit'' data section. All relevant parameters
related to a given maneuver or flight condition must be provided to
allow overall interpretation. When it is difficult or impossible to
match FTD to airplane data throughout a time history, differences must
be justified by providing a comparison of other related variables for
the condition being assessed.
e. It is not acceptable to program the FTD so that the mathematical
modeling is correct only at the validation test points. Unless otherwise
noted, FTD tests must represent airplane performance and handling
qualities at operating weights and centers of gravity (CG) typical of
normal operation. FTD tests at extreme weight or CG conditions may be
acceptable where required for concurrent aircraft certification testing.
Tests of handling qualities must include validation of augmentation
devices.
f. When comparing the parameters listed to those of the airplane,
sufficient data must also be provided to verify the correct flight
condition and airplane configuration changes. For example, to show that
control force is within the parameters for a static stability test, data
to show the correct airspeed, power, thrust or torque, airplane
configuration, altitude, and other appropriate datum identification
parameters must also be given. If comparing short period dynamics,
normal acceleration may be used to establish a match to the airplane,
but airspeed, altitude, control input, airplane configuration, and other
appropriate data must also be given. If comparing landing gear change
dynamics, pitch, airspeed, and altitude may be used to establish a match
to the airplane, but landing gear position must also be provided. All
airspeed values must be properly annotated (e.g., indicated versus
calibrated). In addition, the same variables must be used for comparison
(e.g., compare inches to inches rather than inches to centimeters).
g. The QTG provided by the sponsor must clearly describe how the FTD
will be set up and operated for each test. Each FTD subsystem may be
tested independently, but overall integrated testing of the FTD must be
accomplished to assure that the total FTD system meets the prescribed
standards. A manual test procedure with explicit and detailed steps for
completing each test must also be provided.
h. For previously qualified FTDs, the tests and tolerances of this
attachment may be used in subsequent continuing qualification
evaluations for any given test if the sponsor has submitted a proposed
MQTG revision to the responsible Flight Standards office and has
received responsible Flight Standards office approval.
i. FTDs are evaluated and qualified with an engine model simulating
the airplane data supplier's flight test engine. For qualification of
alternative engine models (either variations of the flight test engines
or other manufacturer's engines) additional tests with the alternative
engine models may be required. This attachment contains guidelines for
alternative engines.

[[Page 201]]

j. Testing Computer Controlled Aircraft (CCA) simulators, or other
highly augmented airplane simulators, flight test data is required for
the Normal (N) and/or Non-normal (NN) control states, as indicated in
this attachment. Where test results are independent of control state,
Normal or Non-normal control data may be used. All tests in Table B2A
require test results in the Normal control state unless specifically
noted otherwise in the Test Details section following the CCA
designation. The responsible Flight Standards office will determine what
tests are appropriate for airplane simulation data. When making this
determination, the responsible Flight Standards office may require other
levels of control state degradation for specific airplane tests. Where
Non-normal control states are required, test data must be provided for
one or more Non-normal control states, and must include the least
augmented state. Where applicable, flight test data must record Normal
and Non-normal states for:
(1) Pilot controller deflections or electronically generated inputs,
including location of input; and
(2) Flight control surface positions unless test results are not
affected by, or are independent of, surface positions.
k. Tests of handling qualities must include validation of
augmentation devices. FTDs for highly augmented airplanes will be
validated both in the unaugmented configuration (or failure state with
the maximum permitted degradation in handling qualities) and the
augmented configuration. Where various levels of handling qualities
result from failure states, validation of the effect of the failure is
necessary. Requirements for testing will be mutually agreed to between
the sponsor and the responsible Flight Standards office on a case-by-
case basis.
l. Some tests will not be required for airplanes using airplane
hardware in the FTD flight deck (e.g., ``side stick controller''). These
exceptions are noted in Section 2 ``Handling Qualities'' in Table B2A of
this attachment. However, in these cases, the sponsor must provide a
statement that the airplane hardware meets the appropriate
manufacturer's specifications and the sponsor must have supporting
information to that fact available for responsible Flight Standards
office review.
m. For objective test purposes, see Appendix F of this part for the
definitions of ``Near maximum,'' ``Light,'' and ``Medium'' gross weight.

End QPS Requirements

________________________________________________________________________

Begin Information

n. In those cases where the objective test results authorize a
``snapshot test'' or a ``series of snapshot test results'' in lieu of a
time-history result, the sponsor or other data provider must ensure that
a steady state condition exists at the instant of time captured by the
``snapshot.'' The steady state condition must exist from 4 seconds prior
to, through 1 second following, the instant of time captured by the snap
shot.
o. Refer to AC 120-27, ``Aircraft Weight and Balance'' and FAA-H-
8083-1, ``Aircraft Weight and Balance Handbook'' for more information.
